PAKISTAN FLOODS 2022
Post-Disaster Needs Assessment




  MAIN
REPORT

                          Ministry of Planning
                          Development &
                          Special Initiatives
PAKISTAN FLOODS 2022
Post-Disaster Needs Assessment



MAIN
REPORT
    © October 2022. The Government of Pakistan, Asian Development Bank, European Union,
    United Nations Development Programme, World Bank

    The Pakistan Post-Disaster Needs Assessment is a product of the Government of
    Pakistan prepared with the support of the Asian Development Bank, the European Union,
    United Nations Agencies with technical facilitation by the United Nations Development
    Programme, and the World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed
    in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of the partner organizations, their Board
    of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. The organizations do not
    guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work.

    “The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on the map in this work
    do not imply any judgment on the part of the Asian Development Bank, the European Union,
    the United Nations Development Programme, or the World Bank concerning the legal status
    of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. Partner Agencies
    have supported the government in application of the Post-Disaster Needs Assessment
    methodology and analysis of data received from provincial and federal agencies, ministries
    and departments.”

    Rights and Permissions

    The material in this work is subject to copyright. To encourage dissemination of this
    information, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for non-commercial
    purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.

    Any queries should be addressed to the Planning Commission, Ministry of Planning
    Development & Special Initiatives, P Block Pakistan Secretariat, Islamabad, Pakistan;
    phone: +92-51-9203865; fax: +92-51-9201777

    Cover photo: UNDP



2   ﻿
Disclaimer

This report summarizes the findings of the Post-Disaster Needs Assessment that took place in Pakistan
following the floods of 2022. The report is based on data collected between September and mid-October
2022. Although all efforts have been made to improve the accuracy of the information that was collected
and analyzed, the assessment was produced in a quick timeframe to ensure the relevance of the
estimations. Given the ongoing nature of the disaster and the lack of access to inundated areas at the time
of publication, remotely sourced data has been triangulated and validated where possible against ground-
based information obtained from the Government of Pakistan, local agencies, and international partners.
Based on these constraints, the authors of the report cannot guarantee the accuracy of the data included
in this work. It provides an overall picture of the effects of the floods on the population, physical assets,
infrastructure, and service delivery, but it is not a replacement of in-depth sector-specific assessments.
More detailed sectoral analyses can be found in the Supplemental Report, which also includes a full list of
contributors. The report uses the exchange rate US$1 = PKR 214.8.1 All monetary estimates are rounded
off to nearest whole number and may not add up to the totals.




1 The average exchange rate during the time of floods, based on the values issued by the State Bank of Pakistan as of the first working
  day of each month, from June to September 2022.




                                                                                                                                     ﻿    3
    Foreword

    The 2022 floods have shown Pakistan’s high vulnerability to climate change despite contributing less than
    one percent of global greenhouse gas emissions. This disaster has demonstrated what this vulnerability
    looks like for the people of the country. Since June this year, the federal and provincial authorities have
    been working tirelessly to manage the massive relief efforts that are ongoing across the country, together
    with local, national, and international partners.

    One-third of the country has been under water, and 33 million people have been affected. Nearly 8 million
    people are reportedly displaced. The scale of the disaster is unprecedented in Pakistan, exceeding the
    damage of the 2010 floods. It will take a collective, international effort to recover from the impacts of this
    calamity.

    The Post-Disaster Needs Assessment that has been undertaken will help understand the scale of
    resources required for recovery and reconstruction by calculating the damage, loss, and needs. However,
    the recovery and reconstruction needs are likely to exceed Pakistan’s available resources and that
    assistance from multilateral and bilateral partners and philanthropists will be needed if the country
    is to rebuild itself in a sustainable and resilient manner.  This comes at a time when countries around
    the world, including Pakistan’s friends and partners, are also facing the impacts of the global economic
    challenges. We would therefore like to acknowledge those partners who are always ready to support
    Pakistan’s recovery.  

    Pakistan faces a cascading crisis. Firstly, in the wake of rising prices at the global level, Pakistan was
    facing significant economic challenges even before the recent floods. In the face of very large fiscal and
    current account deficits, the government took important steps earlier this year to stabilize the economy,
    including implementing difficult energy tariff adjustments and passing a contractionary FY23 budget.
    Secondly, the economic outlook has worsened with the floods, and market risk perceptions are once
    again rising. Growth is expected to slow down, the trade deficit is expected to expand, and revenues are
    expected to decline. Despite the difficulties, the Government is committed to doing its part to mobilize all
    domestic resources possible and target them toward those most in need.




4   Foreword
                                                                                                   Photo credit: UNDP




Thirdly, the floods have disproportionately hit the poorest households in poorest areas. Those areas of
the country where human development outcomes were lowest even before the floods have been hardest
hit. As the country recovers from this terrible disaster, there is an opportunity to do things differently and
to create a better future, especially for areas of the country that had not benefited from the development
of the last two decades. Enhancing Pakistan’s resilience to shocks and stresses amidst climate change,
especially for the poorest, by addressing the underlying drivers of vulnerability and building back better,
is essential for the country’s future.

This PDNA—an effort led by the Government of Pakistan and supported by a core team comprising the
Asian Development Bank, the European Union, and United Nations Agencies, with facilitation from the
United Nations Development Programme and the World Bank—is a critical first step in the process of
recovery and reconstruction. National and international experts across 17 sectors have collaborated
closely with federal and provincial ministries, departments, and agencies to collect data from the 94
calamity-hit districts. The report will support the prioritization and targeting of resources through
multisector recovery planning, which is generally undertaken as part of developing the Disaster Recovery
Framework. It is the first step on the journey to climate-resilient, inclusive, and people-centered recovery.   

On behalf of the Government of Pakistan, I would like to thank all those who have supported Pakistan
through the rescue and relief stage of the disaster and those who will continue to support the country
through the recovery and reconstruction phase. With this collective resolve, I believe we can build a
brighter future from the ruins of the disaster.




Ahsan Iqbal
Minister for Planning, Development and Special Initiatives




                                                                                                      Foreword     5
    Acronyms

     ADB       Asian Development Bank
     ATM       Automated Teller Machine
     BMI       Body Mass Index
     CPI       Consumer Price Index
     CSO       Civil Society Organization
     EU        European Union
     FRP       Floods Response Plan
     FY        Fiscal Year
     GBV       Gender-based Violence
     GDP       Gross Domestic Product
     HCI       Human Capital Index
     KP        Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
     MFB       Microfinance Bank
     MFI       Microfinance Institution
     MoPDSI    Ministry of Planning Development and Special Initiatives
     NDMA      National Disaster Management Agency
     NFRCC     National Flood Response Coordination Centre
     NGO       Non-governmental Organization
     PDNA      Post-Disaster Needs Assessment
     PMD       Pakistan Meteorological Department
     SAR       Synthetic Aperture Radar
     SPI       Sensitive Price Index
     SSGC      Sui Southern Gas Company
     UN        United Nations
     WASH      Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene
     WB        World Bank
     WBG       World Bank Group




6   Acronyms
Acknowledgments

This report has been prepared under the leadership of the Ministry of Planning, Development and
Special Initiatives through its Flood Coordination Cell, supported by the Asian Development Bank,
the European Union, the United Nations agencies with technical facilitation by the United Nations
Development Programme, and the World Bank with financial and technical support from the Global
Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery. It also benefited from the valuable inputs of bilateral and
multilateral partners. This report has benefited from the guidance and inputs of many government
agencies and departments including, at the federal level, the Planning Commission, the Economic Affairs
Division, the National Disaster Management Agency, and the Space and Upper Atmosphere Research
Commission. The report has also been guided and informed by provincial and district governments,
including the Planning and Development Departments and Provincial Disaster Management Agencies.
The team gratefully acknowledges the hard work of everyone who contributed to produce this
document, which will guide the efforts of all those involved in responding to the 2022 Pakistan floods.
A full list of contributors can be found in the Supplemental Report, which will be published separately
and also includes detailed write-ups on each chapter. Photographs used in this publication were taken
by development agencies and partners unless stated otherwise. The team would like to express their
deepest thanks and appreciation to all the contributors.




.




                                                                                            Acknowledgments   7
    Table of Contents
    Foreword                                               4

    Acronyms                                               6

    Acknowledgments                                        7

    Executive Summary                                     10
     Context                                              11
     Summary of Damage, Loss, and Needs                   14
     Macroeconomic and Human Impact: A Cascading Crisis   17
     Next Steps: Pakistan’s Resilient Recovery Strategy   19

    Key Facts                                             22

    1. Post-Disaster Needs Assessment                     24
     Objectives, Approach, and Scope                      25
     Methodology                                          26
     Stakeholder Engagement                               27
     Limitations and Assumptions                          29

    2. Building Back Better for a Resilient Pakistan      30
     Introduction                                         31
     A Compounding Crisis                                 33
     Government and International Response                33
     Pakistan’s Vision for a Resilient Recovery           34

    3. Macroeconomic Impact Assessment                    37
     Pre-floods Economic Scenario                         38
     Economic Impact of the Floods                        39
     Risks and Priorities                                 41

    4. Human Impact Assessment                            42




8
5. Summary of Sector Reports                              48
Social                                                    50
 Housing                                                  51
 Education                                                51
 Health                                                   52
 Culture and Heritage                                     53
Infrastructure                                            54
 Transport and Communications                             55
 Energy                                                   55
 WASH, Municipal Services, and Community Infrastructure   57
Productive Sectors                                        58
 Agriculture, Food, Livestock, and Fisheries              59
 Water Resources and Irrigation                           59
 Commerce and Industries                                  60
 Finance and Markets                                      61
 Tourism                                                  62
Cross-cutting                                             63
 Social Protection, Livelihoods, and Jobs                 64
 Governance                                               64
 Social Sustainability, Inclusion, and Gender             65
 Environment and Climate Change                           66
 Disaster Risk Reduction and Resilience                   67

Annex 1: List of Acknowledgments for the PDNA Stakeholder
Engagement Meetings                                     68




                                                               9
     Executive
     Summary




                         Photo credit: UNDP



10   Executive Summary
Context


Between June and August 2022, torrential rains and a combination
of riverine, urban, and flash flooding led to an unprecedented
disaster in Pakistan. According to the National Disaster Management
Authority (NDMA), around 33 million people—that is, one in seven—
have been affected by the floods, including nearly 8 million
displaced. The floods have taken the lives of more than 1,700 people,
one-third of which were children.2 Rain-induced floods, accelerated
glacial melt, and resulting landslides devastated millions of homes
and key infrastructure, submerging entire villages and destroying
livelihoods. Preliminary estimates suggest that, as a direct
consequence of the floods, the national poverty rate will increase
by 3.7 to 4.0 percentage points, pushing between 8.4 and 9.1 million
people into poverty. As of October 11, 94 districts were declared as
“calamity hit,” accounting for more than half of all districts in the
country. The majority were in the provinces of Balochistan, Sindh,
and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP). Out of the 25 poorest districts in the
country, 19 were calamity-affected.




2 NDMA. October 19, 2022. “NDMA Floods (2022): Sitrep Report No.128.”
  https://cms.ndma.gov.pk/storage/app/public/situation-reports/October2022/
  QECa7rSLzWINuxZFHrHV.pdf.




                                                          Executive Summary   11
     FIGURE 1. EXTENT OF FLOODING COMPARISON BETWEEN AUGUST 4 AND 28, 2022




     Source: NASA Earth Observatory images by Joshua Stevens, using Landsat data from the US Geological Survey and VIIRS
     data from NASA EOSDIS LANCE, GIBS/Worldview, and the Joint Polar Satellite System.3




     Pakistan ranks among the top 10 countries worldwide most affected by climate change.4 The country has
     observed changing weather patterns, including variations in precipitation and temperatures, increased
     frequency and severity of tropical storms and coastal rains, glacial melt, glacial lake outburst flooding,
     sea level rise, loss of biodiversity, desertification, and droughts.5 At the coastal belts of Balochistan and
     Sindh, climate impacts are observed in increased frequency and severity of tropical storms, coastal rains,
     and seawater intrusion. The plains of Punjab and Sindh experience extended and frequent riverine floods
     and heatwaves, affecting economic and human development.6

     In the summer of 2022, the country experienced its wettest August since 1961. Sindh and Balochistan
     provinces were subject to unprecedented rainfall, surpassing average monthly totals by six and seven
     times, respectively. Attribution research has shown that the five-day maximum rainfall, which is a
     measure of heavy precipitation, of these two provinces was around 75 percent more intense than it would
     have been had the climate not warmed by 1.2°C.7 The floods came on the heels of a severe heatwave—
     previously a 1-in-1,000-year event— and drought emergency during which temperatures continuously
     remained above 45°C, resulting in crop losses, power outages, and forest fires. 8


     3 The images combine shortwave infrared, near infrared, and red light (bands 6-5-4) to better distinguish flood waters (deep blue)
       beyond their natural channels. Original image sourced from: https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/images/150279/devastating-floods-in-
       pakistan.
     4 Eckstein, David, Vera Künzel, and Laura Schäfer. 2021. “Global Climate Risk Index 2021.” Germanwatch Briefing Paper. https://www.
       germanwatch.org/en/19777.
     5 Government of Pakistan. 2021. “Updated Nationally Determined Contributions 2021.” https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-
       06/Pakistan%20Updated%20NDC%202021.pdf.
     6 Government of Pakistan. 2021. “Updated Nationally Determined Contributions 2021.” https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-
       06/Pakistan%20Updated%20NDC%202021.pdf.
     7 World Weather Attribution. 2022. “Climate Change Likely Increased Extreme Monsoon Rainfall, Flooding Highly Vulnerable
       Communities in Pakistan.” https://www.worldweatherattribution.org/wp-content/uploads/Pakistan-floods-scientific-report.pdf .
     8 Pakistan Meteorological Department. 2022. “Pakistan’s Monthly Climate Summary: August 2022.” Government of Pakistan. http://
       www.pmd.gov.pk/cdpc/Pakistan_Monthly_Climate_Summary_August_2022.pdf.




12   Executive Summary
While the underlying drivers of the disaster impacts are not limited to climate change, the scale of the
flooding is unprecedented. Following the 2010 floods, which affected 20 million people, Pakistan invested
in disaster risk management. The country had taken critical steps to develop its long-term policies,
including the National Disaster Management Plan and National Flood Protection Plan IV. However,
challenges persisted, such as lack of operationalization and financing for the plans, and limited absorptive
capacity to utilize risk assessments in infrastructure investments and land use planning. At the start of the
2022 monsoon season, the NDMA undertook a comprehensive Monsoon Contingency Planning Exercise,
which included major federal and provincial stakeholders, as well as the international community.
However, Pakistan’s systems and institutions were not adequately equipped for the unprecedented scale
of the climate-induced disaster. The 2022 flooding has further exposed underlying institutional and
systemic challenges, including poor urban planning and water resource management, lack of systems
for infrastructure maintenance, complex governance, structural inequalities, and limited disaster risk
reduction capacity. Simultaneous multiple shocks, including natural hazards, COVID-19, rising inflation, an
energy crisis, and fiscal challenges, continue to compound the impacts. Underlying political and economic
instability are exacerbating the disaster impacts and undermining the effectiveness of recovery. A more
resilient nation is critical to breaking the cycle of disaster-induced poverty.



Humanitarian Response to Recovery and Reconstruction

The scale and prolonged period of the ongoing disaster requires strategic coordination to effectively link
and transition from humanitarian response to recovery. The humanitarian response has been led by the
Government of Pakistan, which established a National Flood Response and Coordination Centre (NFRCC)
to oversee the national response to the monsoon rains and floods. The NFRCC comprises representatives
of federal stakeholders, provincial governments, and the Pakistan Armed Forces. National-level
government assistance is organized through the NFRCC. The Armed Forces and civil administration have
been providing search and rescue, logistics, and engineering support, while the NDMA is procuring relief
supplies and coordinating bilateral in-kind donations for distribution through the Army, which has been
mobilized under constitutional provisions.9

Relief efforts have largely focused on the provision of shelter, safe drinking water, food items, and health
interventions amidst supply chain disruptions. On August 19, the government launched a PKR 37.2 billion
flood relief cash program for 1.5 million affected families. On August 30, the Government of Pakistan and
the United Nations jointly launched the 2022 Pakistan Floods Response Plan (FRP), which highlighted
the main humanitarian needs and outlined an action plan to respond to the immediate needs of the
people. A Revised FRP was released on October 4, appealing for US$816 million to cover the most urgent
needs of 9.5 million people. However, as of October 21, only 13.7 percent of the requested amount has
been funded.10 The international community and local and international organizations have provided aid,
but accessibility due to standing flood waters, flood effects, and complex topographies remain a major
challenge. The Asian Development Bank (ADB), the European Union (EU), the United Nations (UN), and
the World Bank (WB) have supported the Government of Pakistan to conduct this Post-Disaster Needs
Assessment (PDNA) to provide an initial estimate of damage, loss, and recovery and reconstruction needs
from the disaster.



9 Government of Pakistan and United Nation’s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. 2022. “Revised 2022 Flood Response
   Plan: Pakistan.” https://reliefweb.int/report/pakistan/revised-pakistan-2022-floods-response-plan-01-sep-2022-31-may-2023-issued-04-
   oct-2022?_gl=1*zi5z3w*_ga*MjIxMzMyMjcyLjE2NjQ4NTg0Nzc.*_ga_E60ZNX2F68*MTY2NjE5NzE5Ny44LjAuMTY2NjE5NzE5Ny42MC4wLjA.
10 Financial Tracking Service- UNOCHA, 2022. “Pakistan Floods Relief Plan.” https://fts.unocha.org/multiyear/2313/summary




                                                                                                                   Executive Summary      13
     Summary of Damage, Loss, and Needs11


     The total damage is estimated at PKR 3.2 trillion (US$14.9 billion), total loss at PKR 3.3 trillion (US$15.2
     billion), and total needs at PKR 3.5 trillion (US$16.3 billion). The sectors that suffered the most damage
     are housing at PKR 1.2 trillion (US$5.6 billion); agriculture, food, livestock, and fisheries at PKR 800 billion
     (US$3.7 billion); and transport and communications at PKR 701 billion (US$3.3 billion). The transport and
     communications sector has the highest reconstruction and recovery needs at PKR 1.1 trillion (US$5.0
     billion); followed by agriculture, food, livestock, and fisheries at PKR 854 billion (US$4.0 billion), and housing
     at PKR 592 billion (US$2.8 billion). The provinces of Sindh and Balochistan account for approximately 50
     percent and 15 percent of recovery and reconstruction needs, respectively.




     TABLE 1. DAMAGE, LOSS, AND NEEDS BY REGION

                                                 Damage                                Loss                              Needs

      Region                          (Billion PKR)     (Million US$)    (Billion PKR)     (Million US$)     (Billion PKR)    (Million US$)

      Balochistan                                349            1,625               541             2,516              491             2,286

      Khyber Pakhtunkhwa                         201              935               141               658              168               780

      Punjab                                     111               515              122               566              160               746

      Sindh                                    1,948            9,068             2,444            11,376            1,688             7,860

      Cross-Provincial12                         587            2,731                 14               67              975             4,540

      Special Regions13                            7                32                11               49                10               48

      Grand Total                             3,202            14,906             3,272           15,233             3,493            16,261

     Note: All estimates in this report were calculated in PKR and converted to US$ prior to rounding (US$1 = 214.8 PKR on
     average between June and September 2022). The costs are initial estimates and variances may exist due to limitations
     such as data access due to ongoing flooding and lack of baseline information. Precise numbers before rounding are
     provided in the sector assessment reports in the Supplemental Report, published separately.
     While the needs estimate accounts for a build back better premium, it does not comprehensively include new and broader
     investments needed to strengthen Pakistan’s adaptation to climate change and overall resilience to future climate shocks,
     or reconstruction needs of affected private entities.




     11 Damage is defined as direct costs of destroyed or damaged physical assets. It is valued in monetary terms with costs estimated
        based on replacing or repairing physical assets and infrastructure, considering the replacement price prevailing before the crisis.
        Loss is defined as changes in economic flows resulting from the disaster and valued in monetary terms. Together, damage and
        loss constitute the effects of the crisis. Needs costing draws on the monetary value of damage and loss but is not equal to the
        sum of those estimates. Recovery and reconstruction needs are calculated in terms of replacement costs according to current
        prices and include a premium linked to building-back-better principles, and needs associated with the recovery of the sector. The
        reconstruction and recovery needs include short (up to 12 months) and intermediate to long-term (up to five years) activities.
     12 Cross-provincial includes assets that affect more than one province or are calculated at the national level (e.g. railways, roads,
        telecommunications, etc.). The classification is in line with the public budget.
     13 Special regions include districts outside of the four main provinces that have been affected by the floods and declared “calamity-hit.”




14   Executive Summary
TABLE 2. DAMAGE, LOSS, AND NEEDS BY SECTOR GROUP AND SECTOR

                                    Damage                            Loss                           Needs

Sectors                  (Billion PKR)   (Million US$)    (Billion PKR)   (Million US$)   (Billion PKR)   (Million US$)

Social Sectors              1,345            6,261            193             896             832            3,872

Housing                        1,200           5,586                137             636             592         2,757
Health                              23           109                 7              34              40            188
Education                         120            559                 47             219             197            918
Culture and Heritage                 1                6              1                7              2                9
Infrastructure Sectors            843           3,927                85             396          1,168           5,437

Transport and
                                 701           3,264                60              281         1,073           4,994
Communications
Energy                              19               88              1                3              25            117
WASH, Municipal
Services, and
                                  123            575                 24             112              70           327
Community
Infrastructure
Productive Sectors                996           4,635            2,853          13,281           1,022           4,760

Agriculture, Food,
Livestock, and                   800           3,725             1,986          9,244               854          3,976
Fisheries
Water Resources and
                                 153              711                 -               -             168           782
Irrigation
Commerce and
                                    40           186                758         3,527                 -               -
Industries
Finance and Markets                  1                3             90              417               -               -
Tourism                              2               10             20               93             0.4               2
Cross-Cutting Sectors               18               83             142             660             471          2,192

Governance                          13               60              5               23              19              88
Social Sustainability,
                               0.004             0.02                 -               -              21              96
Inclusion and Gender
Social Protection,
                                     -                -             130             607             361         1,683
Livelihoods, and Jobs
Environment and
                                     4               18              6               30              35           164
Climate Change
Disaster Risk
Reduction and                        1                5               -               -              35            161
Resilience
Grand Total                     3,202          14,906            3,272          15,233           3,493          16,261




                                                                                                      Executive Summary   15
                            4.77%
                            $711M
      Agriculture,
      Food, Livestock,                                      Housing
      and Fisheries                                         37.48%             FIGURE 2. DISTRIBUTION OF
      24.99%                                                $5,586M
                                                                               DAMAGE, LOSS, AND NEEDS
      $3,725M
                                                                               BY SECTOR
                                    DAMAGE
                                 $14,906M

           3.85%                                                               SOCIAL SECTORS
           $575M                                                                Housing
                                                                                Health
                  Transport and                     3.75%
                  Communications                                                Education
                                                    $559M
                  21.9%                                                         Culture and Heritage
                  $3,264M


                                    3.99%
                                                                               INFRASTRUCTURE SECTORS
                         2.74%      $607M 4.17%
                                          $636M                                 Transport and Communications
                         $417M
                                                                                Energy
                                                                                WASH, Municipal Services, and
                                                                                Community Infrastructure
        Commerce
        and
        Industries
        23.15%                       LOSS
        $3,527M                  $15,233M                                      PRODUCTIVE SECTORS
                                                                                Agriculture, Food, Livestock, and Fisheries
                                                            Agriculture,        Water Resources and Irrigation
                                                            Food, Livestock,    Commerce and Industries
                                                            and Fisheries       Finance and Markets
                                                            60.68%              Tourism
                                                            $9,244M


                                                                               CROSS-CUTTING SECTORS
                         10.35%                   Housing                       Governance
                         $1,683M                  16.96%                        Social Sustainability, Inclusion and Gender
                                                  $2,757M                       Social Protection, Livelihoods, and Jobs
             4.81%                                                              Environment and Climate Change
             $782M                                                              Disaster Risk Reduction and Resilience
                                                            5.65%
                                     NEEDS                  $918M

                                 $16,261M
      Agriculture,
      Food, Livestock,
      and Fisheries                                    Transport and
      24.45%                                           Communications
      $3,976M                                          30.71%
                           2.01%                       $4,994 M
                           $327 M




16   Executive Summary
Macroeconomic and Human Impact:
A Cascading Crisis


The floods are expected to have a substantial negative impact on Pakistan’s economy. Overall damages
are estimated at PKR 3.2 trillion (US$14.9 billion), equivalent to 4.8 percent of fiscal year (FY)22 gross
domestic product (GDP).14 Among the economic sectors, the agriculture and industry sectors are estimated
to each incur around one-quarter of the damages, and the services sector is bearing close to half of the
total damages. Recovery and reconstruction needs are projected to be sizable at 1.6 times the budgeted
national development expenditure for FY23.15

Economic activity has been disrupted, livelihoods have been severely impacted, with poverty expected to
increase significantly. The size and duration of shocks will vary across locations and households depending
on the intensity of the flooding and the time it takes for the water to recede, their existing socioeconomic
status, as well as the quality and speed of relief and reconstruction efforts. Even in the best-case scenario,
reversing these negative shocks to household welfare will take considerable time, and some losses, such
as losses to human capital and loss of land productivity, could set in motion more durable declines in
welfare and will require specific attention. The government is providing immediate relief to the impacted
communities and supporting the early recovery, while aiming to ensure macroeconomic stability and
fiscal sustainability. Moving forward, as recovery and reconstruction spending rises, the loss in output
could be mitigated. Yet, significant international support will be needed to complement Pakistan’s own
commitment to increase domestic revenue mobilization and save scarce public resources, and to reduce
the risk of exacerbating macroeconomic imbalances. Evidence from previous natural hazards in Pakistan
suggests that economic impacts may persist for an extended period, with damage to the productive
capacity of the economy reducing growth prospects over the medium term.

Overall decline in GDP as a direct impact of the floods is projected to be around 2.2 percent of FY22 GDP.16
Among the major sectors, agriculture sector value added is projected to decline the most at 0.9 percent
of FY22 GDP, with floods causing the most losses to cotton, dates, sugarcane, and rice crops. Around
1 million livestock are estimated to have perished. Furthermore, damage in the agricultural sector is
expected to have spillover effects on the industry and services sectors. Flood-related cotton losses are
expected to weigh on the domestic textile industry, as local cotton constitutes about half of the industry’s
required cotton input. Textiles account for around one-quarter of total industry output and more than
half of goods exports. Similarly, the local food processing and slaughtering industries will be negatively
impacted by the expected reduction in food harvests and reduced supply of livestock. Industry sector
value added is consequently expected to shrink by 0.7 percent of FY22 GDP. Similarly, lower agricultural
and industrial activity are likely to weigh on wholesale and transportation services activities, which
account for around half of the service sector output. In addition, transportation challenges arising from
the loss of critical infrastructure, such as roads and bridges, are expected to disrupt supply and further
dampen overall economic activity. Services sector value added is consequently projected to decline by
0.6 percent of FY22 GDP.


14 GDP at market prices at current prices for FY22 (PKR 66.9 trillion).
15 According to the FY23 Federal Budget, the total national Public Sector Development Programme allocation is PKR 2,158 billion.
16 Nominal GDP at market prices for FY22 (PKR 66.9 trillion).




                                                                                                                 Executive Summary   17
     The disaster will have profound impact on lives and livelihoods. Preliminary estimates of the PDNA suggest
     that the national poverty rate will increase by 3.7 to 4.0 percentage points, pushing between 8.4 and 9.1
     million people into poverty, as a direct consequence of the floods. Similarly, multidimensional poverty
     will increase by 5.9 percentage points, meaning that an additional 1.9 million households will be pushed
     into non-monetary poverty. Beyond the national average, poverty in Sindh would increase by between
     8.9 and 9.7 percentage points, and in Balochistan by between 7.5 and 7.7 percentage points. Moreover,
     the depth and severity of poverty will increase for households that were already poor prior to the floods.
     The poverty gap has substantially increased, with the number of extremely poor people living more than
     20 percent below the poverty line increasing from 18 to 25–26 million. The impact on household welfare
     will come through at least four channels: (i) loss of household income and employment/livelihoods due
     to destroyed harvest, killed livestock, or inactivity of businesses; (ii) loss of assets, including homes,
     livestock, productive equipment, and household durables; (iii) rising food prices due to shortages of food
     arising from lost food stocks and poor harvests; and (iv) loss of human capital, given the significant threat
     of disease outbreaks and food shortages, and prolonged school closures, with attendant learning losses.

     Even prior to the flooding, many of the calamity-hit districts showed higher monetary and non-monetary
     deprivations, especially among households in rural areas. Nineteen of the 25 poorest districts in the
     country were calamity-affected. Moreover, higher stunting rates in these districts undermined progress
     toward better development outcomes.17 Households in calamity-hit districts were more impoverished
     than the national average (31.2 percent compared to 21.9 percent), and poverty rates for many flood-
     affected districts in Sindh and Balochistan were much higher. For instance, district-level poverty rates for
     calamity-hit districts in Balochistan ranged from 26.3 percent in Kohlu to 75.8 percent in Khuzdar; and in
     Sindh, from 15 percent in Hyderabad to 53.4 percent in Badin.

     Reversing these negative shocks to household welfare will take considerable time, and losses to human
     capital and land productivity can set in motion more durable declines in welfare. The impact of the floods
     is likely to exacerbate already existing inequalities, revealing serious differences in safety, education,
     decision-making, and employment. Vulnerable groups, such as women, children, people with disabilities,
     and refugees, are likely to be disproportionally affected by the floods due to their limited access and
     availability to social protection and coping mechanisms.




     17 Based on survey-based estimates for the PDNA. Given restrictions in data access, the analysis only describes outcomes for 75
        calamity-hit districts in Punjab, KP, Sindh, and Balochistan.




18   Executive Summary
Next Steps:
Pakistan’s Resilient Recovery Strategy


The catastrophic floods are a wake-up call for systemic changes to address the underlying vulnerabilities
to natural hazards and their intersection with other shocks. At this critical point, swift action is necessary
for a paradigm shift to build systemic resilience to natural hazards in development planning and asset
management. This requires a participatory and inclusive approach, bringing together civil society,
government, private sector, academia, think tanks, and the international community around a common
vision. Stakeholder engagement will be necessary to inform the scope, design, institutional arrangements,
and a monitoring and accountability framework for a comprehensive resilient recovery program. Such
a program should prioritize the urgent needs of the affected population while ensuring that results are
delivered in an efficient, equitable, and transparent manner. Building on global good practices of recovery
and integrating the specific socioeconomic, cultural, and institutional context of Pakistan through a
people-centric approach will be crucial.



Disaster Recovery Framework

The vision of Pakistan’s recovery framework is to achieve an inclusive and resilient recovery through
a “Whole of Pakistan” approach, leading to sustainable development for the people and country. This
vision rests on three key pillars and an underlying foundation. The strategic recovery objectives of
the framework and guiding principles of the vision, articulated below, will be critical. The underlying
foundation is comprised of three approaches—(i) build back better; (ii) people-centered socioeconomic
recovery; and (iii) developing systemic resilience against natural hazards and climate change impacts—
all of which must be applied across the board. Built on this foundation are three pillars: (i) restoration of
jobs and livelihoods; (ii) recovery and reconstruction of critical assets, services, and infrastructure; and
(iii) strengthening governance and stakeholder capacity for reconstruction, especially communities.



Recovery and Reconstruction Objectives

The strategic recovery pillars noted above will be supported by five strategic recovery objectives:

• Enhancing governance and capacities of the state to restore lives and livelihoods of the affected
  people, especially the most vulnerable.
• Restoring livelihoods and economic opportunities.
• Ensuring social inclusion and participation in all aspects of recovery and related development.
• Restoring and improving basic services and physical infrastructure in a resilient and sustainable
  manner.
• Developing an enabling environment and facilitating private sector participation and financing.




                                                                                              Executive Summary   19
     Guiding Principles to Support the Vision

     The following guiding principles will be critical to ensure recovery and reconstruction efforts take a
     consistent approach:

     • Participatory, inclusive, and green recovery for long-term resilience.
     • Pro-poor, pro-vulnerable, and gender sensitive, targeting the most affected.
     • Coordination of government tiers through centralized policy, planning, and coordination; and
       decentralized implementation.
     • Invest in nature-based solutions and ecosystem-based adaptation measures.
     • Conflict-sensitive implementation.
     • Prioritize institutional and regulatory reforms to ensure sustainability.
     • Use of local materials, knowledge, skills, and labor.
     • Avoid relocation as much as possible.
     • Balance between public and private sector recovery.
     • Emphasis of synergies between humanitarian effort and recovery.



     Next Steps

     Strategic prioritization of interventions across all sectors is the crucial next step toward finalizing
     the recovery framework. The framework will provide guidance on how the PDNA recommendations18
      will be operationalized by prioritizing the most affected sectors and interventions in the immediate
     and short term (up to 12 months) and linking them with the medium to longer-term recovery and
     reconstruction needs. Further work will involve prioritizing needs based on criteria such as urgency,
     institutional capacity, and financing feasibility. Institutional arrangements, financing plans, and detailed
     recovery action plans must be developed. The recovery and reconstruction should prioritize the urgent
     needs of the affected population and ensure an efficient, equitable, coordinated, and transparent delivery
     led by the government and supported by the international community. Although the focus will be on
     the affected areas, the creation of the recovery framework presents an opportunity to systematically
     embed resilience to natural hazards and climate change in Pakistan’s development planning—a turning
     point on how the country continues its growth. Transformational action will be critically important to
     achieve the vision of an inclusive and resilient recovery through a “Whole of Pakistan” approach, leading
     to sustainable development for the people and country.




     18 The recommendations can be found in the Supplemental Report, a companion report which will be published separately and includes
        detailed sectoral analyses.




20   Executive Summary
Photo credit: UNDP




    Executive Summary   21
Key Facts                                                                                SCOPE

                                                        GEOGRAPHIC SCOPE:

                                                        The geographic coverage of the assessment is
Led by the Government of Pakistan and supported
                                                        limited to 94 calamity-hit districts as of October
by the Asian Development Bank, the European Union,
                                                        11 across the four provinces of Balochistan, KP,
the United Nations, and the World Bank, the PDNA
                                                        Punjab, and Sindh. The analysis also includes
provides an initial estimate of damages, losses, and
                                                        estimates for special regions and at a cross-
needs resulting from the disaster.
                                                        provincial level.19



     OBJECTIVES
                                                        SECTORAL SCOPE:
The objectives of the PDNA are to:
• assess the impact of the disaster on the              In addition to a macroeconomic and human impact
   population, physical assets, and service delivery;   analysis, the assessment includes 17 sectors,
• conduct a preliminary estimate of infrastructure      grouped across four thematic areas:
   reconstruction and service delivery restoration      Social: Housing; Health; Education; Culture and
   needs in the short, medium, and long term; and       Heritage.
• contribute to a resilient recovery and
   reconstruction strategy and a coordinated            Infrastructure: Transport and Communications;
   national and international effort for building       Energy; Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH),
   back better.                                         Municipal Services, and Community Infrastructure.
                                                        Productive: Agriculture, Food, Livestock, and
                                                        Fisheries; Water Resources and Irrigation;
                                                        Commerce and Industries; Finance and Markets;
                                                        and Tourism.
     DATA SOURCES                                       Cross-cutting: Governance; Social Sustainability,
     AND METHODOLOGY                                    Inclusion, and Gender; Social Protection,
                                                        Livelihoods, and Jobs; Environment and Climate
                                                        Change; Disaster Risk Reduction and Resilience.

The analysis blended ground-based data and
remotely collected data, relying on cutting-edge
remote-sensing technology to reach inaccessible
areas and corroborate information. Various sources      TEMPORAL SCOPE:
were used to triangulate and improve the veracity
of the data. Ground-based data was provided from        The PDNA analyses and recommendations
provincial governments and ministries, and remote       only focus on the impact and the recovery and
data was collected through high resolution satellite    reconstruction needs as a result of the flooding.
imagery, synthetic aperture radar (SAR), publicly       Damage, loss, and needs calculations were
available data, and international organizations.        therefore made relative to a pre-flood baseline.
Data was analyzed using geospatial data layers          The data was collected from September to mid-
and crowd-sourced and open-sourced mapping              October 2022.
platforms. The government and international
partners hosted Stakeholder Engagement Meetings
to validate the data and ensure the humanitarian
response is linked with the recovery process.
The PDNA adapts from the Post-Disaster Needs            19 Special regions include districts outside of the four main
Assessment methodology jointly developed by the            provinces that have been affected by the floods and
                                                           declared “calamity-hit.” Cross-provincial includes assets
EU, the World Bank Group (WBG), and the UN.                that affect more than one province or are calculated at the
                                                           national level (e.g., railways, roads, telecommunications).



22   Key Facts
                                        Oct 12 - 15
                                        Draft Sector
                                          Reports

             Oct 1                                  Oct 14                                           Oct 28
       Stakeholder                                  Finalization of Preliminary                  Launch of
Engagement Meeting                                  Assessment                             PDNA Main Report




       Sep 14                                Oct 13
       Mobilization of                       Data Analysis
       Assessment Teams                      Completion


               Sep 22 - Oct 12
               Data Collection
                                             Oct 12 and 19
                                      Validation with Government                           MILESTONES




                                                KEY FINDINGS

                                                                                       RECOVERY AND
  DAMAGE                                      LOSS                                     RECONSTRUCTION
                                                                                       NEEDS



  3.2          PKR
               trillion
  (US$ 14.9 billion)
                                              3.3          PKR
                                                           trillion
                                              (US$ 15.2 billion)
                                                                                       3.5          PKR
                                                                                                    trillion
                                                                                       (US$ 16.3 billion)
  with housing; agriculture, food,            with agriculture, food,                  with transport and
  livestock, and fisheries; and               livestock, and fisheries                 communication; agriculture,
  transport and communication                 suffering the most losses,               food, livestock, and fisheries;
  sectors most severely                       followed by commerce                     and housing sectors being the
  affected.                                   and industries; and social               highest, respectively.
                                              protection, livelihoods, and
                                              jobs sectors.




                                     • Extensive damage in agriculture, industry, and service sectors, estimated to be
                                       equivalent to 4.8 percent of FY22 GDP.
        IMPACT ON                    • Significant losses in GDP as a direct impact of the floods, projected to be around
                                       2.2 percent in FY22, with agriculture accounting for the largest decline at 0.9
        ECONOMY                        percent.
                                     • Unprecedented recovery and reconstruction needs projected at 1.6 times the
                                       budgeted national development expenditure for FY23.
                                     • Widening effect on primary and overall fiscal deficits.
                                     • Rising prices of food and essential items.
                                     • Higher poverty rates, with national poverty rate estimated to increase by 3.7 to
                                       4.0 percentage points, pushing between 8.4 and 9.1 million people into poverty.


                                                                                                             Key Facts   23
     1. Post-Disaster
     Needs Assessment




                                         Photo credit: UNDP



24   1. Post-Disaster Needs Assessment
Objectives, Approach,
and Scope


The Pakistan PDNA assesses the impact of the floods on the
population, physical assets, and service delivery in 94 calamity-
hit districts across Pakistan between June and October 2022. It
provides a preliminary estimate of infrastructure reconstruction
and service delivery restoration needs in the short, medium, and
long term. Moreover, the PDNA will serve as the foundation for
future analytical assessments and reports, including a resilient
recovery and reconstruction strategy and a coordinated national
and international effort for building back a more resilient Pakistan.

The PDNA follows a globally established and recognized damage,
loss, and needs assessment methodology jointly developed by
the EU, the WBG, and the UN. This methodology has been applied
globally in post-disaster and conflict contexts to inform recovery
and reconstruction planning. In the case of Pakistan, the PDNA
approach explicitly includes opportunities to build back better
and smarter guided by principles of inclusion, resilience, and
sustainability.

The PDNA is structured as two reports: the (i) Main Report, including
estimations on damage, loss, and needs, methodology overview,
resilient recovery strategy, macroeconomic and human impacts,
and a summary of sector assessments; and the (ii) Supplemental
Report, including full sector assessment reports, detailed
methodology, as well as a full list of contributors and credits.

Geographic Scope: The geographic coverage of the assessment
is limited to 94 calamity-hit districts across the four provinces
of Balochistan, KP, Punjab, and Sindh. The analysis also includes
estimates for special regions and at a cross-provincial level.




                                        1. Post-Disaster Needs Assessment   25
     Sectoral Scope: In addition to a macroeconomic and human impact analysis, the assessment includes 17
     sectors, grouped across four thematic areas:

     • Social: Housing; Health; Education; Culture and Heritage.
     • Infrastructure: Transport and Communications; Energy; Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH),
       Municipal Services, and Community Infrastructure.
     • Productive: Agriculture, Food, Livestock, and Fisheries; Water Resources and Irrigation; Commerce
       and Industries; Finance and Markets; and Tourism.
     • Cross-cutting: Governance; Social Sustainability, Inclusion, and Gender; Social Protection, Livelihoods,
       and Jobs; Environment and Climate Change; Disaster Risk Reduction and Resilience.

     Temporal Scope: The PDNA analyses and recommendations only focus on the impact and the recovery
     and reconstruction needs as a result of the flooding. Damage, loss, and needs calculations were therefore
     made relative to a pre-flood baseline. The data was collected from September to mid-October 2022.




     Methodology


     The PDNA assesses (i) damage; (ii) loss; and (iii) the recovery and reconstruction needs. The quantitative
     results and qualitative analysis of all three were utilized to assess the macroeconomic and human impact.

     A core team comprising of individuals from the ADB, EU, UN, and WBG coordinated the assessment with
     the Ministry of Planning Development and Special Initiatives (MoPDSI) at the federal level. The MoPDSI
     facilitated the provision of primary damage data through relevant federal and provincial entities. Under
     the PDNA methodology, all secondary data received from the MoPDSI was validated through several
     measures including remote-sensing and analysis through SAR and visual imagery, triangulation across
     affected districts and sectors, desk review, existing reports and consultations with the stakeholders, and
     limited field damage inspection. Based on the above, analytical work was undertaken by sector teams for
     a comparative pre- and post-disaster assessment of the infrastructure and services affected, which is
     summarized in Section 5. The summaries provide the damage, loss, and needs for each sector covered in
     this assessment. However, not every sector reported an estimate for each category due to the nature of
     the sector, variations in impact, and data availability.

     The PDNA uses the following key definitions, which are described in greater detail in the annex of the
     Supplemental Report.

     Damage is defined as direct costs of destroyed or damaged physical assets. It is valued in monetary terms
     and costs are estimated based on replacing or repairing physical assets and infrastructure, considering
     the replacement price prevailing before the crisis.

     Based on the reported damage level, each asset was assigned a physical damage status based on
     three classifications: no damage; partially damaged (less than 40 percent of the asset is damaged); or
     completely destroyed (more than 40 percent of the asset is damaged, or the damage is structural). For the
     damage estimation, the average was calculated based on the number of damaged facilities, their physical




26   1. Post-Disaster Needs Assessment
status (partially damaged or completely destroyed), and the estimated pre-crisis unit cost associated with
each asset class.

Loss is defined as changes in economic flows resulting from the disaster andit is valued in monetary
terms. Together damage and loss constitute the “effects” of the crisis.

Typical loss includes the decline in output in productive sectors and the lower revenues and higher
operational costs in the provision of services (e.g., social or infrastructure sectors). They also include
unexpected expenditures to meet immediate needs (e.g., the cost for additional doctors, teachers,
vaccination campaigns, rubble removal, temporary shelters).

Recovery and Reconstruction Needs costing draws on the monetary value of damage and loss, but they
are not equal to the sum of those estimates. Recovery and reconstruction needs are calculated in terms
of replacement costs according to current prices and include a premium linked to building-back-better
principles (such as improved energy efficiency, modernization efforts, and sustainability standards) and
needs associated with the recovery of the sector. Recovery needs take into account “softer” or non-
infrastructure-related aspects, such as staffing, equipment, or materials required to bring assets and
services back to the pre-crisis level. Needs also consider issues such as global inflation, surge pricing
due to volume of construction materials, and higher insurance. The reconstruction and recovery needs
include short (up to 12 months) and intermediate to long-term (up to five years) activities. While the needs
estimate accounts for a build back better premium, it does not comprehensively include new and broader
investments needed to strengthen Pakistan’s adaptation to climate change and overall resilience to future
climate shocks, or reconstruction needs of affected private entities.




Stakeholder Engagement


A “Whole of Pakistan” approach was adopted for the PDNA, in which the team engaged with representatives
and stakeholders from distinct spheres of Pakistani society. These engagements included a variety
of individuals from national and local government authorities, UN agencies, local and international
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), civil society organizations (CSOs), the private sector, youth
organizations, academia, and donor agencies. This approach helped to inform the PDNA’s findings,
analyses, and recommendations on the emerging needs and priorities of the affected population and the
resilient recovery strategy presented in this report. Special attention was made to include stakeholders
actively involved in the process of assessing damage, providing aid, and rehabilitating Pakistan. To
stimulate discussion, smaller sector-specific breakout sessions were held after the plenary session to
discuss technical details with stakeholders.

The virtual Stakeholder Engagement Meetings, held on October 1 and organized by the Government of
Pakistan and facilitated by core international partners, aimed to provide a platform for a participatory
and inclusive process. The focus of these discussion extended beyond the humanitarian phase to include
the linkages with the recovery phase. Stakeholders were asked to share their insights from the ground,
including current relief activities, and priority recovery and reconstruction needs and suggestions for
implementation of the identified sequenced priorities. Participants from CSOs across Pakistan provided




                                                                               1. Post-Disaster Needs Assessment   27
     feedback on the impact of the crisis, ongoing humanitarian and recovery activities, and future priority
     recovery and reconstruction needs in the short, medium, and long term. Sector-specific conversations
     were structured around three key questions:

     • What humanitarian activities are currently ongoing in your sector that could be linked with future
       activities to support longer-term recovery?
     • What are the key priorities needed to promote recovery and restore services and livelihoods in your
       sector in the short, medium, and long term?
     • Suggestions for implementing the above considering the challenges as a result of the floods (capacity,
       supply, and other constraints, etc.)?

     The priority areas identified for recovery include supporting affected livelihoods; developing low-
     cost solutions to quickly restore community-based and inclusive infrastructure, including shelter;
     administering critical healthcare to flood-affected communities, especially to women; and employing
     nature-based solutions where possible to improve future preparedness. Stakeholders highlighted the
     need for community representation in relief, recovery, and rebuilding discussions, and for the data
     collected and recovery plans formulated by CSOs to be consolidated by the government.

     With respect to longer-term recovery, stakeholders from different sectors emphasized that ongoing
     initiatives should be scaled up to support the recovery of vulnerable communities. This includes measures
     such as low-cost, high-yield seeds in the agriculture sector; clean drinking water and sanitation; and
     community-based, resilient infrastructure. Recovery should be carried out in a way that is inclusive of
     marginalized groups, including women, persons with disabilities, and religious minorities.

     Stakeholders agreed that there are significant challenges to recovery, of which financing was deemed the
     foremost, given the scale and intensity of the damage. Some areas were also inundated for weeks after
     the floods, hindering access to relief efforts and data collection. Stakeholders also highlighted the need
     to tailor recovery and reconstruction strategies to different regions and contexts, utilizing indigenous
     knowledge and integrating multi-hazard resilient repair and reconstruction to build back better. There
     was also consensus surrounding promoting effective policies and enforcing regulations; building the
     capacities of government and non-government bodies to adopt climate-smart interventions; and raising
     community awareness about disasters and climate risks to bolster longer-term preparedness. Concerns
     were also raised about areas with existing development deficits where infrastructure and services would
     have to be established anew; a lack of mandatory contingency stocks; and the absence of baseline data
     for several areas.




     Limitations and Assumptions


     Limitations

     The below challenges were mitigated as much as possible through the design of the assessment
     methodology and close cooperation between government authorities, international organizations, CSOs,
     and private sector institutions.


28   1. Post-Disaster Needs Assessment
Data Availability: Some areas were still submerged during the assessment period, which limited the
accuracy of data collection for certain sectors. The extent of the impact of the flooding was therefore not
fully ascertained in those areas. While certain remote-sensing tools such as SAR were able to bypass
this limitation, it was not utilized for every sector. However, the findings are not expected to increase
significantly over time for most sectors.

Lack of Baseline Information: The absence of baseline information at the district level was a challenge
for certain sectors, making it difficult to systematically assess the effects of the disaster on sectors and
services. The PDNA addresses this by collecting data from various sources, including population and
census data, to formulate a baseline for each sector against which more recent data may be compared.

Data Disaggregation: This report does not include gender disaggregated data or data disaggregated with
respect to demographics due to unavailability of such data for this rapid assessment. It is nonetheless
important to highlight that the disaster has created different challenges for recovery and access to
services for women and girls.



Assumptions

Some specific assumptions are made for the purpose of this assessment:

• Damage, loss, and needs are presented in PKR and US dollars. The exchange rate of US$1 = PKR 214.8
  is used throughout the report.20
• The PDNA is broad-brush in nature and not intended as a substitute for in-depth, sector-level
  assessments which would be required for future recovery projects.
• The PDNA assessment methodology is time-bound; however, damage, loss, and needs may be higher
  than what is reported in the PDNA as certain areas are still inundated with water and the full extent
  of the impact in those select areas is yet to be determined. However, the PDNA provides an estimate
  on infrastructure and service delivery and the findings are not expected to increase significantly over
  time.
• The geographic and sectoral distribution were selected in coordination with the Government of
  Pakistan and international partners based on areas and sectors that were most impacted. This does
  not suggest that other areas or sectors were unaffected by the flooding.




20 The average exchange rate of the State Bank of Pakistan of the first working day from June to September.




                                                                                                1. Post-Disaster Needs Assessment   29
     •




     2. Building Back Better
     for a Resilient Pakistan




                                                 Photo credit: UNDP


30   2. Building Back Better for a Resilient Pakistan
Introduction


The floods of 2022 have devastated people’s lives, assets, and
livelihoods on an unprecedented scale. The disaster was triggered
by the heaviest and most concentrated monsoon rains ever recorded
in the country. Around 33 million people—one in seven—have been
affected, including nearly 8 million displaced. An estimated 15
million people remain directly exposed or close to flood areas. The
floods have taken the lives of more than 1,700 people, one-third of
which were children. As of October 11, 94 districts were declared
as “calamity hit” by government authorities, which amounts to
more than half of all districts in the country. The majority are in the
provinces of Balochistan, Sindh, and KP.



An Unprecedented Climate-induced Disaster

Pakistan’s high vulnerability to climate change is a risk multiplier,
compounding its human and economic development challenges.
Pakistan ranks among the top 10 countries worldwide most
affected by climate change.21 Extreme weather events have been
increasing in frequency and intensity, impacting ecosystems,
people, settlements, and infrastructure. The country is increasingly
exposed and vulnerable to various natural hazards, particularly
floods, tropical cyclones, droughts, landslides, and earthquakes.
The ND-Gain Index has ranked Pakistan as the 39th most vulnerable
country and the 27th least ready country in the world to address
the impacts of climate change.22 The poor are the most vulnerable
as they are the most reliant on agriculture, livestock, fisheries,
forests, and groundwater, which are now heavily degraded. They
are further most directly impacted by natural hazards and the slow
onset of climate change.23




21 Eckstein, David, Vera Künzel, and Laura Schäfer. 2021. “Global Climate Risk Index
   2021.” Germanwatch Briefing Paper. https://www.germanwatch.org/en/19777.
22 ND-GAIN Index (dataset). “Pakistan.” https://gain-new.crc.nd.edu/country/pakistan.
23 Government of Pakistan. 2021. “Updated Nationally Determined Contributions
   2021.”    https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-06/Pakistan%20Updated%20
   NDC%202021.pdf.




                                     2. Building Back Better for a Resilient Pakistan   31
     In the summer of 2022, the country experienced its wettest August since 1961. Shortly after a record
     heatwave and drought emergency, Sindh and Balochistan provinces were subject to unprecedented
     rainfall, surpassing average monthly totals by six and seven times, respectively.24 Attribution research
     has shown that the five-day maximum rainfall, which is a measure of heavy precipitation, of these two
     provinces was around 75 percent more intense than it would have been had the climate not warmed by
     1.2°C.25 Although further analysis is needed to understand the causes of the flood event, it is clear the
     simultaneous riverine, urban, and flash flooding culminated in an unprecedented disaster, inundating
     areas historically not prone to floods.




     FIGURE 3. MAP OF FLOODING EXTENT AND INTENSITY




     Source: Ipsos Risk Analytics/World Bank, September 2022.




     24 Pakistan Meteorological Department. 2022. “Pakistan’s Monthly Climate Summary: August 2022.” Government of Pakistan. http://
        www.pmd.gov.pk/cdpc/Pakistan_Monthly_Climate_Summary_August_2022.pdf.
     25 World Weather Attribution. 2022. “Climate Change Likely Increased Extreme Monsoon Rainfall, Flooding Highly Vulnerable
        Communities in Pakistan.” https://www.worldweatherattribution.org/wp-content/uploads/Pakistan-floods-scientific-report.pdf.




32   2. Building Back Better for a Resilient Pakistan
A Compounding Crisis


The catastrophic flooding has triggered a cascade of crises and consequences are still unfolding.
Crop and livestock loss, as well as displacement, have led to loss of livelihoods. Lost food stocks, poor
harvests, and rising food prices will exacerbate food insecurity and nutrition outcomes. The prevalence
of standing water, lack of safe drinking water, and limited access to sanitation and hygiene services
are contributing to a rise in waterborne illnesses and further loss of lives. Prolonged school closures
and lack of education access will have long-lasting impacts on learning outcomes. The extensive loss of
livelihoods, assets, and human capital builds on existing disparities and will affect the most vulnerable
and marginalized households, with disproportionate impacts on women and girls. The floods have
also exacerbated long-standing structural weaknesses, posing risks to a sustained recovery. Ensuring
macroeconomic stabilization while supporting relief and recovery is a complex challenge with worsening
external conditions, including the rise of global commodity prices and interest rates.26 Political stability
is critical for a coherent and timely response. As climate change accelerates the severity and frequency
of disasters, institutional reforms and investments must go beyond business as usual and build systemic
resilience. If transformational measures are not taken for a resilient recovery, the disaster will have
multi-generational impacts through the reduction of developmental gains.




Government and International Response


The humanitarian response has been led by the Government of Pakistan, which established the NFRCC to
oversee the national response to the monsoon rains and floods. The NFRCC comprises representatives of
federal stakeholders, provincial governments, and the Pakistan Armed Forces. National-level government
assistance is organized through the NFRCC. The Armed Forces and civil administration have been providing
search and rescue and logistics and engineering support, while the National Disaster Management Agency
is procuring relief supplies and coordinating bilateral in-kind donations for distribution through the Army,
which has been mobilized under constitutional provisions.27

The humanitarian situation continued to deteriorate in August as heavy rains continued to cause flooding
and landslides. On August 5, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs officially requested humanitarian assistance
from the UN and international community. On August 19, the government launched a PKR 37.2 billion flood
relief cash program for 1.5 million affected families. On August 30, the Government of Pakistan and the
UN jointly launched the 2022 Pakistan FRP, which highlighted the main humanitarian needs and outlined
an action plan to respond to the immediate needs of the people. On October 4, a Revised Pakistan FRP was




26 Details on the macroeconomic and human impact are detailed in Sections 3 and 4, respectively.
27 Government of Pakistan and United Nation’s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. 2022. “Revised 2022 Flood Response
   Plan: Pakistan.” https://reliefweb.int/report/pakistan/revised-pakistan-2022-floods-response-plan-01-sep-2022-31-may-2023-issued-04-
   oct-2022?_gl=1*zi5z3w*_ga*MjIxMzMyMjcyLjE2NjQ4NTg0Nzc.*_ga_E60ZNX2F68*MTY2NjE5NzE5Ny44LjAuMTY2NjE5NzE5Ny42MC4wLjA.




                                                                                      2. Building Back Better for a Resilient Pakistan    33
     released, appealing for US$816 million to cover the most urgent needs of 9.5 million people. However, as
     of October 21, only 13.7 percent of the requested amount has been funded.

     Relief efforts have largely focused on the provision of shelter, safe drinking water, food items, and health
     interventions amidst supply chain disruptions. The international community, as well as over 100 local and
     international organizations, have provided aid, but accessibility due to standing flood waters, flood effects,
     and complex topographies remain a major challenge. Although some areas have proceeded to an early
     recovery phase, the scale and prolonged period of the ongoing disaster requires strategic coordination to
     effectively link and transition from humanitarian response to recovery.




     Pakistan’s Vision for a Resilient Recovery


     The catastrophic floods are a wake-up call for systemic changes to address the underlying vulnerabilities
     to natural hazards and their intersection with other shocks. At this critical point, swift action is necessary
     for a paradigm shift to mainstream resilience to natural hazards in development planning and asset
     management. This requires a participatory and inclusive approach, bringing together civil society,
     government, private sector, academia, think tanks, and the international community around a common
     vision. The diaspora will also be critical considering their role in remittances and long-term foreign
     direct investments. Stakeholder engagement will therefore be necessary to inform the scope, design,
     institutional arrangements, and a monitoring and accountability framework for a comprehensive resilient
     recovery program. Such a program should prioritize the urgent needs of the affected population while
     ensuring that results are delivered in an efficient, equitable, and transparent manner. Building on global
     good practices of recovery and integrating the specific socioeconomic, cultural, and institutional context
     of Pakistan through a people-centric approach will be crucial.



     Disaster Recovery Framework

     The vision rests on three key pillars and an underlying foundation. The strategic recovery objectives of
     the framework and guiding principles of the vision, articulated below, will be critical.




34   2. Building Back Better for a Resilient Pakistan
FIGURE 4. RECOVERY AND RECONSTRUCTION VISION



  VISION
                 An inclusive and resilient recovery through a “Whole of Pakistan” approach, leading to
                                  sustainable development for the people and country




                                                    Recovery and                  Strengthening governance

  PILLARS
               Restoration of jobs and         reconstruction of critical          and stakeholder capacity
                     livelihoods                 assets, services, and                for reconstruction,
                                                    infrastructure                  especially communities




  FOUNDATION
                                                   Build Back Better
                                      People-centered socioeconomic recovery
                   Building systemic resilience against natural hazards and climate change impacts




Recovery and Reconstruction Objectives

The strategic recovery pillars will be supported by five strategic recovery objectives:

• Enhancing governance and capacities of the state to restore lives and livelihoods of the affected
  people, especially the most vulnerable.
• Restoring livelihoods and economic opportunities.
• Ensuring social inclusion and participation in all aspects of recovery and related development.
• Restoring and improving basic services and physical infrastructure in a resilient and sustainable
  manner.
• Developing an enabling environment and facilitating private sector participation and financing.



Guiding Principles to Support the Vision

The following guiding principles will be critical to ensure recovery and reconstruction efforts take a
consistent approach:

• Participatory, inclusive, and green recovery for long-term resilience.
• Pro-poor, pro-vulnerable, and gender sensitive, targeting the most affected.
• Coordination of government tiers through centralized policy, planning, and coordination; and
  decentralized implementation.
• Invest in nature-based solutions and ecosystem-based adaptation measures.
• Conflict-sensitive implementation.



                                                                      2. Building Back Better for a Resilient Pakistan   35
     •   Prioritize institutional and regulatory reforms to ensure sustainability.
     •   Use of local materials, knowledge, skills, and labor.
     •   Avoid relocation as much as possible.
     •   Balance between public and private sector recovery.
     •   Emphasis of synergies between humanitarian effort and recovery.



     Next Steps

     Enabling Policies and Institutional Arrangements: Two key steps are necessary in order to achieve the
     vision and objectives:: (i) the notification of enabling recovery policies; and (ii) the finalization of appropriate
     institutional and implementation arrangements. Sector-specific policies related to housing, agriculture,
     and livelihoods are urgently needed as recovery is already fragmented. The appropriate institutional
     and implementation arrangements should be based in good governance. The arrangements will need to
     include special provisions for strategic oversight and decision-making; coordination, management, and
     monitoring of operations; and transparency, accountability, and equity in resource allocation, especially for
     priority recovery interventions. Institutional arrangements will also need to include citizen engagement
     and ensure participation by civil society stakeholders.

     The institutional and implementation arrangements are key to creating an enabling environment early in
     the recovery process. Coordination of the different tiers of government, including between federal and
     provincial governments, will be key. The institutional arrangement setup, financing, and implementation
     arrangements will be undertaken through a combination of centralized coordination and planning, and
     decentralized implementation. Central coordination is critical for setting standards, policies, and principles
     to guide the recovery and ensure inclusiveness, transparency, and good governance. The institutional and
     implementation arrangements are key to creating an enabling environment early in the recovery process.
     Special arrangements to balance effective, consistent, and efficient processes in the recovery will be
     important. This includes fiduciary requirements, such as fast-tracked time-based recovery plans and
     corresponding investment approvals, and procurement processes.

     Recovery Planning: The recovery framework should provide guidance on how the PDNA recommendations
     will be operationalized by prioritizing the most affected sectors and interventions in the immediate and
     short term (up to 12 months) and linking them with the medium to longer-term recovery and reconstruction
     needs. Strategic prioritization of interventions across all sectors, along with stakeholder mapping and
     resource mobilization planning, should be initiated. Prioritizing needs based on criteria, such as urgency,
     institutional capacity, and financing feasibility, and developing financing plans and detailed recovery
     action plans will also be necessary. The plan should prioritize the urgent needs of the affected population
     and take an inclusive, participatory, and conflict-sensitive approach, ensuring an efficient, equitable,
     coordinated, and transparent delivery that is led by the government and supported by the international
     community. A coordinated transition from humanitarian response to recovery will be a complex yet critical
     challenge. The recovery and reconstruction plan should be rooted in detailed analysis, including multi-
     hazard risk assessments, which will be essential to understanding the underlying drivers of the flooding
     and its long-term impacts. Embedding systemic resilience beyond reconstruction through investments
     in physical, social, financial, and human capital will provide an opportunity for Pakistan to transform its
     development trajectory.




36   2. Building Back Better for a Resilient Pakistan
3. Macroeconomic
Impact Assessment




                          Photo credit: UNDP


             3. Macroeconomic Impact Assessment   37
     The devastating floods of 2022 are expected to have a substantial negative impact on Pakistan’s economy.
     Economic activity has been severely disrupted, and livelihoods have been impacted; poverty is expected
     to increase significantly. The government will need to provide immediate relief to impacted communities
     and support recovery, while simultaneously ensuring macroeconomic stability and fiscal sustainability.
     This will present difficult policy tradeoffs in the context of challenging global economic conditions, high
     government debt and debt service payments, and already-large domestic and external financing needs.
     Evidence from previous natural disasters in Pakistan suggests that economic impacts may persist for
     an extended period, with damages to the productive capacity of the economy reducing growth prospects
     over the medium term.




     Pre-floods Economic Scenario


     Prior to the floods, Pakistan’s economy was facing difficult economic conditions and undergoing adjustment
     measures to regain macroeconomic stability. Supported by accommodative macroeconomic policies,
     the economy expanded by 6.0 percent in FY22. Strong domestic demand, coupled with low productivity
     growth, high world commodity prices, and the global economic slowdown, contributed to severe external
     imbalances. The current account deficit consequently reached 4.6 percent of GDP in FY22—the largest
     in four years. The fiscal deficit (excluding grants) was also large at 7.9 percent of GDP in FY22. The large
     current account and fiscal deficits, together with political and policy uncertainty, contributed to a loss of
     investor confidence, leading to pressures on the exchange rate, foreign reserves, and domestic prices over
     late FY22. To stabilize the economy and complement the ongoing monetary tightening, the government
     began implementing a range of policies to constrain aggregate demand, including a contractionary budget
     and increases in domestically administered energy prices. The federal government had targeted a fiscal
     deficit of 4.9 percent of GDP and a primary surplus of 0.2 percent of GDP for FY23, down from the 7.9
     percent fiscal deficit and 3.1 percent primary deficit in FY22. Real GDP growth was therefore expected to
     slow significantly in FY23 prior to the floods, to around 3.5 percent.28 As a result of stabilization measures,
     total public debt was expected to decline gradually from current high levels, while foreign exchange
     reserves were expected to slowly accumulate.




     TABLE 3. KEY MACROECONOMIC INDICATORS FY18–22 (YEAR-ON-YEAR, %)

                                                                                FY18        FY19        FY20        FY21        FY22

      GDP Growth (at factor cost)                                                  6.1         3.1       -0.9         5.7         6.0

      Agriculture                                                                  3.9         0.9        3.9         3.5         4.4

      Industry                                                                     9.2        0.2        -5.7         7.8         7.2

      Services                                                                    6.0         5.0         -1.2        6.0         6.2




     28 International Monetary Fund. September 1, 2022. “Pakistan: Seventh and Eighth Reviews under the Extended Arrangement under
        the Extended Fund Facility, Requests for Waivers of Nonobservance of Performance Criteria, and for Extension, Augmentation, and
        Rephasing of Access.” Press Release, Staff Report, Staff Statement, and Statement by the Executive Director for Pakistan.




38   3. Macroeconomic Impact Assessment
                                                                            FY18         FY19         FY20       FY21        FY22

 Real GDP Growth (at market price)                                             6.2         2.5          -1.3       6.5         6.2

 Private consumption                                                           7.2         5.6         -2.8        9.3        10.0

 Government consumption                                                        5.5        -1.6          8.5        1.8        -3.4

 Investment                                                                    9.9        -9.7         -6.1        4.7         2.9

 Gross fixed capital formation                                               10.3        -11.1         -6.7        4.5         2.5

 Public                                                                      18.5       -33.0         -12.9       11.9        12.7

 Private                                                                       7.1        -1.7         -4.9        2.5        -0.5

 Exports of goods and non-factor services                                    10.0         13.2          1.5        6.5         8.4

 Imports of goods and non-factor services                                     15.7         7.6         -5.1       14.5        15.6

 Consumer Price Index (CPI) Inflation                                          4.7         6.8         10.7        8.9        12.2

 Current Account Balance (% of GDP)                                           -5.4        -4.2          -1.5      -0.8        -4.6

 Fiscal Balance (% of GDP), excluding grants                                  -5.8        -7.9          -7.1      -6.1         -7.9

 Public Debt, including govt. guaranteed debt (% of GDP)                      67.1       78.0          81.1       75.6        78.0

Source: Pakistan Bureau of Statistics, State Bank of Pakistan




Economic Impact of the Floods


The floods are expected to have a substantial adverse impact on output, which will vary substantially
by region and sector. The aggregate economic impact of the floods will, however, depend on the policy
response. Substantial expenditures on relief, recovery, and rehabilitation could mitigate the loss in output
at the potential cost of worsening fiscal and external imbalances.

Overall damages are estimated at PKR 3.2 trillion (US$14.9 billion), equivalent to 4.8 percent of FY22 GDP.29
The agriculture sector and industry sector each incurred one-quarter of the total damages, while the
services sector accounted for nearly half of the total damages.

Among the major economic sectors, agriculture sector value added is projected to decline the most, at 0.9
percent of FY22 GDP, with floods causing the most losses to cotton, date, sugarcane, and rice crops. Around
1 million livestock are also estimated to have perished.30 Furthermore, damages in the agricultural sector
are expected to have spillover effects on the industry and services sectors. Flood-related cotton losses are
expected to weigh on the domestic textile industry, as local cotton constitutes about half of the industry’s
required cotton input. Textiles account for around one-quarter of total industry output and more than
half of goods exports. Similarly, the local food processing and slaughtering industries will be negatively
impacted by the expected reduction in food harvests and reduced supply of livestock. As a result, industry
sector value added is expected to shrink by 0.7 percent of FY22 GDP. Similarly, lower agricultural and

29 GDP at market prices at current prices for FY22 (PKR 66.9 trillion; US$31.1 billion).
30 NDMA. October 19, 2022. “NDMA Floods (2022): Sitrep Report No.128.” https://cms.ndma.gov.pk/storage/app/public/situation-reports/
   October2022/QECa7rSLzWINuxZFHrHV.pdf.




                                                                                                 3. Macroeconomic Impact Assessment    39
     industrial activity is likely to adversely impact wholesale and transportation services activities, which
     account for around half of service sector output. In addition, transportation challenges arising from the
     loss of critical infrastructure (e.g., roads and bridges) are expected to disrupt supply and further dampen
     overall economic activity. Value added in the service sector is consequently projected to decline by 0.6
     percent of FY22 GDP. Overall GDP decline as a direct impact of the floods is estimated to be around 2.2
     percent of FY22 GDP.
     The direct adverse impact of the floods on economic growth is expected to be partially mitigated by
     fiscal measures undertaken by the government. A flood relief cash transfer scheme is underway, through
     which 1.1 million targeted households are being provided with PKR 25,000 to meet emergency needs. In
     addition, a temporary elimination of customs duties on essential items for flood-associated relief work
     has been introduced. Additional budget allocations are expected to be required to meet relief and recovery
     needs during FY23. Meanwhile, fiscal revenues are expected to be dampened by contracting tax bases,
     suspension of some food import duties, and slower activity overall. In light of the greater expenditure
     needs and lower revenue collections, the floods are expected to have a widening effect on the primary
     and overall fiscal deficits.


     The floods will also exacerbate existing external pressures. Around 50 percent of the required cotton input
     for the local textile industry is sourced domestically. With reduced supplies of domestic cotton, cotton
     imports are expected to increase to mitigate the shortage. Imports of food products, wheat, pulses,
     construction machinery, and medicines are also expected to increase based on increased needs and
     domestic shortages. Meanwhile, reduced exports of textiles, rice, fruits and vegetables, leather products,
     cement, and sugar are expected to further widen the trade deficit. Based on the 2010 floods experience,
     workers’ remittances are likely to increase and continue to play an essential role in financing household
     consumption and the trade gap. Recent data on remittances recorded an inflow of US$2.7 billion during
     August 2022, posting an increase of 1.6 percent year-on-year, up from a contraction of 7.7 percent for July
     2022.
     Inflationary pressures are expected to continue being elevated on account of rising food prices and the
     weaker exchange rate. With the hike in government administered energy prices, headline CPI inflation
     had soared to 27.3 percent and 23.2 percent in August and September 2022, respectively. Inflation could
     increase further as food prices rise in response to crop damage, loss of livestock, and the disruption of
     transport infrastructure critical for supplying agriculture output to markets. In the CPI basket of goods,
     essential food commodities such as wheat, rice, chicken, meat, eggs, milk, and fresh vegetables make up
     18.4 percent of the total urban CPI and 26.9 percent of the rural CPI. Increase in the prices of these items
     due to their direct link to the domestic production of crops, poultry, and other livestock will ultimately
     increase CPI. Price increases as measured by the Sensitive Price Index (SPI), which measures price
     changes of selected essential items on a weekly basis, had been consistently rising through August,
     reaching a peak of 45.5 percent for the week ending September 1. Within the SPI basket of goods, food
     items that have recorded rapid increases in prices are tomatoes, onions, potatoes, eggs, and chicken.




     Risks and Priorities


     The floods are expected to have a substantial negative impact on Pakistan’s economy. Prior to the floods,
     the economy was already facing a difficult adjustment to regain macroeconomic and fiscal stability.
     Implementation of government plans for the necessary fiscal consolidation is likely to become more



40   3. Macroeconomic Impact Assessment
challenging given extensive relief and recovery spending needs and slower growth of tax bases due to
weaker economic activity. While targeted relief measures are needed to cushion the human and economic
impacts of flooding, delays in fiscal consolidation will heighten risks to macroeconomic and fiscal stability
in the context of the high inflation and fiscal and current account deficits. Similarly, monetary policy
should necessarily be maintained at the current tight stance given the overheating economy, extremely
high inflation rates, and exchange rate depreciation pressures.

The full economic impact of the floods remains unknown as the situation is still evolving. Large areas
remain inundated, hindering on-the-ground damage assessments. Estimates of flood impacts could
therefore worsen as more information becomes available from previously inaccessible areas, or through
further crop and livestock losses due to shortages of animal feed, disease, or impacts on the next
planting season. Economic challenges would intensify with worsening flood impacts and with delayed or
inadequate response efforts.

Largely due to high persistent fiscal deficits, the financial sector has a large exposure to government
securities, intertwining its health with the fiscal resilience of the government. Per regulations, bank
holdings of government papers need to be “marked-to-market” or revalued daily in response to changes
in interest rates in the secondary markets. As interest rates have been increasing, banks are exposed
to interest rate risks on their government securities and have started to incur sizable losses on their
government-investment portfolios. Flood-related losses have also exposed the microfinance sector to
significant downside risks both in terms of profitability and stability in the immediate to medium term. In
addition, unanticipated fiscal financing needs are expected to be largely met from domestic borrowing,
possibility contributing to further crowding-out of private sector financing, increasing debt servicing
costs, and strengthening the sovereign-financial nexus and associated risks.

To manage short-term risks, the government needs to strike a delicate balance between progressing
on the required fiscal consolidation and meeting targeted relief and recovery needs. In the context of
high domestic and external financing needs, ongoing political uncertainties, and upcoming elections,
maintaining market confidence will be critical. Clearly articulating and effectively implementing an
economic recovery could help manage market perceptions. It will be critical to maintain a tight monetary
policy stance; pursue fiscal consolidation to the extent possible, including through the tight targeting and
prioritization of any new expenditures; and proceed with planned structural reforms, including in the
energy sector.

Given Pakistan’s limited fiscal resources, significant international support and private investment will
be essential for a comprehensive and resilient recovery. The Pakistani authorities are committed to
accelerate reforms to generate additional domestic fiscal resources and improve efficiency and targeting
of public spending. Beyond the immediate needs of floods reconstruction, these reforms, while protecting
the most vulnerable, will be important to generate fiscal space to invest more broadly into more climate-
resilient infrastructure and adaptation to climate change, as well as to build buffers to face future shocks,
while addressing macroeconomic imbalances. This commitment of the Government will also be key to
mobilize further international support as well as to unlock private sector sources of financing—both of
which will be absolutely critical to face the current climate change-induced shock.




                                                                              3. Macroeconomic Impact Assessment   41
     4. Human Impact
     Assessment




                                  Photo credit: UNDP



42   4. Human Impact Assessment
The size and duration of shocks will vary across locations and
households. This is dependent on the intensity of the flooding
and the time it takes for the water to recede, the pre-floods
socioeconomic status of the household, and the quality of relief and
reconstruction efforts. Even in the best-case scenario, reversing
these negative shocks to household welfare will take considerable
time; and some losses, such as losses to human capital and loss
of land productivity, could set in motion more durable declines in
welfare and will require specific attention.

Prior to the floods, many of the calamity-hit districts already
suffered from higher monetary and non-monetary poverty,
especially among households in rural areas. Moreover, higher
stunting rates in these districts undermined progress toward better
development outcomes.31 In 2018–19, 21.9 percent of the population
(around 50 million people) lived below the national poverty line.
Beyond the national average, rural poverty was more than twice as
high as urban poverty (28.2 percent compared to 10.9 percent), and
four out of five poor households lived in rural areas.32 Households
in calamity-hit districts were more impoverished than the national
average (31.4 percent compared to 21.9 percent), and poverty rates
for many flood-affected districts in Sindh and Balochistan were
much higher. For instance, district-level poverty rates for calamity-
hit districts in Balochistan ranged from 26.3 percent in Kohlu to
75.8 percent in Khuzdar; and for Sindh, from 15.0 percent in
Hyderabad to 53.4 percent in Badin. Out of the 25 poorest districts
in the country, 19 were calamity-affected.

Non-monetary measures of poverty suggest that during the pre-
flood period, households in calamity-hit districts also experienced
worse living standards and gaps in access to utilities. These
households were likelier to live in katcha or katcha/pucca homes
(made entirely or partially of mud and unbaked bricks), which
heightened their vulnerability to disasters such as flooding.
Furthermore, 15.7 percent of people in calamity-hit districts lacked
access to electricity, compared to 9.3 percent nationally. Households
were also more likely to lack access to basic sanitation facilities and
clean water. In calamity-hit districts, 11 percent did not have access
to clean water, almost twice the national average of 6.5 percent.



31 This section is largely based on survey-based estimates; given restrictions in
   access the data, the analysis only describes outcomes for 75 calamity-hit districts
   in Punjab, KP, Sindh, and Balochistan.
32 Beyond spatial differences in poverty rates, female-headed households are on
   average poorer than those headed by men.




                                                         4. Human Impact Assessment      43
     Beyond monetary and non-monetary poverty, areas affected by the floods showed some of the highest
     stunting rates in the country. Stunting is worse in rural areas and among poor households that lack
     adequate water and sanitation facilities. Sindh and Balochistan stand out at the province level.33 Similarly,
     vast differences can be seen among districts, where district-level stunting rates of over 50 percent are
     commonplace. In addition, estimates suggest that on average, 20 percent of the households in flood-
     affected areas were moderately or severely food insecure,34 which is above the national average of 16
     percent.35 Among provinces, the highest proportion of people food insecure are in Sindh with 22.3 percent
     (3.9 million people) and Balochistan with 22.7 percent (1.6 million people).

     Higher poverty rates in calamity-hit districts reflect lower productivity and more limited resilience
     arising from deficits to their human capital endowment, and constraints in access to opportunities in
     labor markets. Before the 2022 floods, these overlapping deprivations made households and individuals
     more vulnerable to natural hazards and, ex-post, exposed them to further risks to either fall deeper or
     remain behind permanently. For instance, the Human Capital Index (HCI) for Pakistan suggests that a
     child born today will be 41 percent as productive when they grow up as they could be if they enjoyed
     complete education and full health. This is lower than the average for the South Asia region and lower
     middle-income countries. Due to lower school attendance rates in Balochistan and KP, Due to lower
     school attendance rates and worse health outcomes in Balochistan and KP, the HCI is likely to be lower
     in calamity-hit districts than the rest of the country.36 In addition, prior to the floods, less than half of the
     population had adequate health care coverage. At the national level, the percentage of women availing
     postnatal care was only 33 percent and child mortality was high.37 Nationwide, close to 22 million children
     aged five to 16 years were out of school during 2019/20.

     Employment in the calamity-hit districts was mainly concentrated in rural areas at 16.3 million people,
     representing nearly 75 percent of all employment in these districts. The latest figures from the Labour
     Force Survey 2020–21 suggest that 43 percent of the employed population (around 9.4 million people)
     worked in the agriculture sector in the affected districts, which is above the national average of 38.5
     percent. In terms of employment status, many of the employed population in these districts were in
     vulnerable forms of employment, including own-account workers in the agriculture and non-agriculture
     sectors (3.6 million and 2.3 million people, respectively), contributing family workers in agriculture (4.1
     million), and casual paid employees (3.5 million people), with only 4.7 million people employed in somewhat
     secure forms of employment. In addition, in the flood-affected areas, 80 percent of those employed are
     men, thus revealing significant gender disparities.38

     The 2022 floods are expected to have a profound impact on lives and livelihoods. The assessment focuses
     on the direct impact of the floods and accounts for changes in household welfare arising from damage
     and loss, and disruption to basic services, in the aftermath of the floods. The impact on household welfare
     will come through at least four channels: (i) loss of household income and employment/livelihoods due


     33 Figures are estimated from the provincial Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys: Balochistan 2010; Punjab 2011, 2014, 2017; Sindh 2014;
        KP 2016, 2019.
     34 Estimates based on Food Insecurity Experience Scale.
     35 Government of Pakistan. 2021. “Pakistan Social and Living Standard Measurement Survey Report 2019–2020.” Pakistan Bureau of
        Statistics.
     36 Girls have less access to health and education services than boys do, potentially decreasing their earning potential and increasing
        their vulnerability to poverty as adults. ADB. 2010. “Sindh Growth and Rural Revitalization Program.” https://www.adb.org/sites/
        default/files/linked-documents/41545-02-pak-sprss.pdf.
     37 According to the Pakistan Demographic Health Report, under-five mortality rate was 74 deaths per 1,000 live births, infant mortality
        rate was 62, and the neonatal mortality rate was 42.
     38 Women make up 68 percent of the agriculture labor force. See: Government of Pakistan. 2022. Labour Force Survey 2020–21.”
        Pakistan Bureau of Statistics. https://www.pbs.gov.pk/sites/default/files/labour_force/publications/lfs2020_21/LFS_2020-21_Report.
        pdf. For more details on the impact of the floods on employment, livelihoods, and incomes, please refer to the Social Protection,
        Livelihoods, and Jobs subsection in Section 5.




44   4. Human Impact Assessment
to destroyed harvest, killed livestock, or inactivity of businesses; (ii) loss of assets, including homes,
livestock, productive equipment, and household durables; (iii) rising food prices due to shortages of food
arising from lost food stocks and poor harvests; and (iv) loss of human capital, given the significant threat
of disease outbreaks and food shortages, and prolonged school closures, with attendant learning losses.

Preliminary estimates suggest that the national poverty rate will increase by 3.7 to 4.0 percentage
points, pushing between 8.4 and 9.1 million people into poverty, as a direct consequence of the floods.
Similarly, multidimensional poverty will increase by 5.9 percentage points, meaning that an additional 1.9
million households will be pushed into non-monetary poverty. Estimates focus on the short-term impact.
Depending on location and design of relief and reconstruction, the impact may vary. Beyond the national
average, poverty in Sindh would increase by between 8.9 and 9.7 percentage points, and in Balochistan
by between 7.5 and 7.7 percentage points. Moreover, the depth and severity of poverty will increase for
households that were already poor prior to the floods. The poverty gap has substantially increased, with
the number of extremely poor people living more than 20 percent below the poverty line increasing from
18 to 25–26 million.

Beyond the increase of monetary poverty, estimates indicate an increase in multidimensional poverty
from 37.8 percent to 43.7 percent, meaning that an additional 1.9 million households will be pushed into
non-monetary poverty. This entails significant increased deprivations around access to adequate health,
sanitation, quality maternal health care, electricity, and loss of assets. Multidimensional poverty will
increase by 13 percentage points in KP, followed by 10.9 in Balochistan, and 10.2 in Sindh.

Vulnerable groups such as women, children, people with disabilities, and refugees are likely to be
disproportionally affected by the floods given their dire circumstances and limited access to social
protection and coping mechanisms. The impact of the floods is likely to exacerbate already existing
gender inequalities, revealing serious differences in safety, education, decision-making, and employment.
More than 800,000 Afghan refugees currently live in calamity-hit districts in Pakistan. These refugees
are likely to be poorer than community members, have fewer assets (including land), and live in camps
with poor basic services, and depend on humanitarian assistance. Furthermore, 3.8 million people with
disabilities live in the calamity-hit districts. People with disabilities are often marginalized, economically
disempowered, and face discrimination in education, employment, housing and transport, and other
social services.39

Beyond the increase of monetary poverty, the 2022 floods will have a detrimental impact on human
development outcomes, potentially deepening existing inequities across households and individuals. The
floods will trigger substantial losses to human capital (education and health) with increased incidence of
stunting and learning losses, which will have a long-lasting impact on productivity and resilience unless
addressed during the rehabilitation phase. An additional 1.2 million households with children between
six and 11 years of age will be prevented from attending school, with girls’ education disproportionately
deprioritized at the household level. This will significantly disrupt, and in some cases effectively halt, their
formal education. In addition to learning loss, school closures have impacted children’s mental health,
reduced their access to a regular source of nutrition, and increased their risk of abuse. This situation
further increases young girls’ vulnerabilities and chances of unintended pregnancy and early and forced
marriages.

In addition, recent gains in infant and maternal health may be reversed, undermining efforts to reduce
poverty. There will be an increase in the proportion of households deprived of access to health facilities

39 For more details on vulnerable groups, please refer to the Social Sustainability, Inclusion, and Gender subsection in Section 5.




                                                                                                           4. Human Impact Assessment   45
     (such as clinics and basic health units) from 31.4 percent to 34.9 percent, representing an additional
     1.2 million households. As a result, an additional 5.5 million households with children under five will
     not be fully immunized, leaving children at risk of deadly and preventable diseases. An additional 2.8
     million households with newborns will be deprived from ante-natal check-ups and post-natal care.
     Furthermore, 1.5 million households will be deprived of clean water and sanitation, placing more pressure
     on overstretched healthcare services, thus perpetuating a vicious cycle of disease and poverty. Women
     will be disproportionately impacted given their role as water and solid waste managers at the household
     level and as caregivers.40 The floods will likely aggravate the burden on women’s duties and increase their
     vulnerability in terms of both health and personal safety.

     Preliminary estimates suggest an additional 7.6 million people face food insecurity at the national level,
     increasing from 7 million to 14.6 million people, as a result of loss of production and price increases. The
     highest number of food insecure people are in Sindh (8.2 million), followed by Balochistan (2.4 million), KP
     (2.3 million), and Punjab (1.7 million). Expected delays in the sowing of rabi41 crops, particularly wheat, are
     likely to further reduce food availability and drive price increases in the coming months, making access
     to food more difficult, particularly for low-income groups in hard-hit areas.

     Food shortages and widespread disease, associated with increased deprivations of access to safe
     drinking water and sanitation, will likely have a significant impact on stunting rates in the long term.
     Regression analysis on stunting suggests that lacking an improved source of drinking water can increase
     the likelihood of stunting by 9 percent. Lack of adequate sanitation also increases the possibility of
     stunting by 4 percent. Children from the poorest households (lowest 20 percent wealth status) face the
     brunt of poor nutritional status, with a 43 percent likelihood of being stunted. A mother’s body mass index
     (BMI) is crucial to a child’s nutritional status. Children of mothers with a low BMI are 40 percent more
     likely to be stunted.

     Women in particular have suffered notable losses to their livelihoods, particularly associated with
     agriculture and livestock, with attendant negative impacts on their economic empowerment and well-
     being. The floods have increased women’s vulnerability to gender-based violence (GBV) due to aggravated
     household tensions, harassment, and abuse related to displacement and lack of secure infrastructure.
     Rates of early and forced marriages often increase in the wake of crises and economic security. The
     United Nations Population Fund estimates that 640,000 adolescent girls during the current crisis are
     vulnerable and at increased risk of coercions, GBV, and child marriage. Moreover, some other groups of
     the population might experience disproportional losses, including refugees and displaced persons from
     Afghanistan, since they are inadequately covered in national household surveys.42

     In response to the floods, many individuals and households will experience a deterioration of their living
     standards and circumstances. Interventions should provide immediate relief to those most in need, and
     the recovery must address the vulnerabilities of those most affected to strengthen the inclusive character
     of the recovery.

     In the immediate aftermath of the floods, social assistance and emergency cash transfers will play an
     essential role in compensating households for damage and loss of livelihoods, assets, and rising prices,


     40 Women already spend 10 times the hours as men in unpaid care work. See: United Nations Development Programme. March 12,
        2021. “Womenomics: Women Empowering the Economy.” Special Edition Report, Development Advocate Pakistan. https://www.undp.
        org/pakistan/publications/womenomics-women-powering-economy-pakistan.
     41 Rabi crops are agricultural crops that are sown in winter and harvested in spring.
     42 For more details on the impact of the floods on vulnerable groups, please refer to the Social Sustainability, Inclusion, and Gender
        subsection in Section 5.




46   4. Human Impact Assessment
especially for food. Cash transfers can also help prevent households from engaging in negative coping
strategies, including child labor.

The provision of emergency health services, with a particular focus on children and women, needs to
address a looming health crisis. The increased risks arising from waterborne diseases such as cholera,
malaria, and dengue, and the collapse of safe sanitation and limited access to nutrition could have long-
lasting implications for inclusive growth (including a rise of stunting rates). Particular attention should
be given to pregnant women, lactating mothers, newborns, children under five, immunocompromised
persons, and patients with chronic diseases, including people with disabilities and the elderly, whose pre-
existing conditions are further aggravated (or whose drug adherence was compromised) by the lack of
access to drugs and health services as a result of the floods.

Finally, programs and policies to support recovery need to reach the worst affected geographic areas
and all types of households. Livelihood assistance could support future income generation. Grants,
especially to smallholder farmers, could secure their survival, while also contributing to future food
supply. International evidence suggests that labor-intensive construction works, such as cash-for-work
schemes in infrastructure rehabilitation, will be important to support livelihood restoration and income-
generating opportunities. Such schemes should include technical facilitation and skills development on
climate adaptation and resilience building.




                                                                      Photo credit: PRIDE - SIA Pakistan




                                                                                     4. Human Impact Assessment   47
     5. Summary of
     Sector Reports




48   5. Summary of Sector Reports
Photo credit: UNDP



5. Summary of Sector Reports   49
              Social




                       Photo credit: UNDP



50   Social
Housing


Damage: PKR 1,200 billion (US$5,586 million)
Loss: PKR 137 billion (US$636 million)

The 2022 flooding caused widespread destruction of housing and human settlements. In the 94 calamity-
hit districts, approximately 780,000 houses were destroyed and more than 1.27 million houses were
partially damaged. Rural houses were particularly impacted, and the extent of damage incurred to katcha
houses has been higher than that to pucca houses. Among provinces, the housing stock in Sindh has been
the worst affected, accounting for 83 percent of the total housing damages. The damage to houses not
only caused significant loss of household assets, but a severe disruption to family life. Housing losses
caused large-scale displacement with associated risks, including to health.

Recovery and Reconstruction Needs: PKR 592 billion (US$2,757 million)

Reconstruction should be an opportunity to build not just safer homes, but resilient communities, villages,
and cities. The needs estimate is largely premised on the subsidy required to support a core housing unit of
one room, which includes a kitchen and toilet rebuilt to an appropriate and affordable hazard-and climate-
resilient standard. Any additions to the core unit may be added by the owners. Housing reconstruction
should have a longer-term horizon and be supported by better planning and development regulations,
coordinated service delivery, and stronger capacity of communities and government institutions to
manage disaster and climate risks. The priority interventions in the immediate to short term should
be to develop housing and settlement recovery policies and institutional arrangements to coordinate
stakeholders and service delivery, and to plan and manage implementation. Communities require prompt
technical guidance and support where flood water has already receded, and over a sustained period
where reconstruction is protracted.




Education


Damage: PKR 120 billion (US$559 million)
Loss: PKR 47 billion (US$219 million)

The 2022 floods caused unprecedented cumulative damage and loss to the public education sector. In
the assessed districts, the entire span of education services, from pre-primary to lifelong learning, has
suffered. The floods have impacted approximately 17,205 public schools (primary to higher secondary),
colleges, special education centers/schools/institutions, technical and vocational education and training
centers, and universities. At least 6,225 education institutions were assessed as fully damaged and
10,980 as partially damaged. This has affected some 94,478 teachers and 2.6 million enrolled students




                                                                                                      Social   51
     (of which over 1 million are estimated to be female students). School education (pre-primary to higher
     secondary) suffered the most, with a 97 percent share of all damaged education institutions affecting an
     estimated 2.4 million students. Within school education, the damage to primary schools is highest with
     an 80 percent share of all damaged institutions, affecting 1.1 million students.

     Recovery and Reconstruction Needs: PKR 197 billion (US$918 million)

     The roadmap for recovery includes an immediate focus on the resumption of learning through alternative
     or temporary learning spaces to mitigate risks to children and adolescents’ education, protection, and
     well-being. This is particularly important as the reconstruction and repair of accessible, safe, secure, and
     inclusive education institutions will continue into the medium to long term. Ensuring quality education
     should be prioritized throughout all recovery phases, including the need to assess learning losses, plan
     for learning recovery, establish systems to track students’ access and learning, and continuous education
     and support for teachers to adapt to new conditions. Recovery strategies should also emphasize the
     need to strengthen disaster preparedness and response at all levels through disaster risk management
     training and emergency response planning in the medium term and incorporating disaster resilience in
     education sector planning and implementation in the long term.




     Health


     Damage: PKR 23 billion (US$109 million)
     Loss: PKR 7 billion (US$34 million)

     The 2022 floods affected close to half of the country, damaging 13 percent of the health facilities, which
     in turn interrupted health service delivery from the community level (primary healthcare including
     Rural Health Centers and Basic Health Units) through the secondary level (District Headquarters,
     Tehsil Headquarters, and Civil Hospitals). More than one-fifth of affected facilities were fully damaged.
     Malnutrition, which was already dangerously high, has substantively increased. Around 650,000 pregnant
     women are facing challenges in getting access to maternal services, while nearly 4 million children lack
     access to health services. Pakistan is experiencing substantive increases of communicable diseases such
     as acute diarrhea, cholera, malaria, and dengue. Disruption in health service delivery will increase health
     inequities for the poor and disadvantaged due to hindered access to services such as immunizations,
     routine medical care including medication for chronic disease, maternal and child health services, as well
     as risk of higher out-of-pocket health expenditures.

     Recovery and Reconstruction Needs: PKR 40 billion (US$188 million)

     This analysis, which was limited to the public health system only, accounts for the: (i) reconstruction of
     health infrastructure with improved resilient capacities for PKR 27.1 billion (US$126 million); (ii) immediate
     additional needs for resumption of health services, including an urgent response to outbreaks of vaccine-
     preventable and communicable diseases, which will be the top priority followed by earliest resumption
     of essential healthcare to affected populations for a total of PKR 5.8 billion (US$27 million); and (iii) use of
     prefabricated facilities and the use of mobile clinics to reach the most vulnerable communities for a total


52   Social
of PKR 7.2 billion (US$34 million). Immediate action is required to restore essential service delivery and
critical public health functions, particularly disease outbreak surveillance in affected districts, to minimize
the impact of the disaster on health of population. For the medium and long term, there is need to build
resilient health systems and infrastructure to enhance the readiness to respond to crises (infectious disease
outbreaks, natural hazards), while also maintaining core functions of health systems.




Culture and Heritage


Damage: PKR 1.3 billion (US$6.1 million)
Loss: PKR 1.4 billion (US$6.7 million)

The 2022 floods severely impacted the culture sector across Pakistan. Early estimates indicate at least
149 sites, including two World Heritage Sites in Sindh, have suffered partial but considerable damage
across the assessed areas. In addition, numerous Buddhist stupas, Hindu temples, and tombs of pre-
and post-Islamic dynasties have suffered extensive damages. Religious sites in active use, including
mosques, shrines, and dargahs, have also been extensively damaged. While movable heritage and cultural
repositories have remained largely unscathed, the affected sites are in danger of further deterioration
as stagnant floodwater in some areas is affecting foundational stability and structural integrity. Many of
the impacted sites are historically and culturally significant, and deterioration and damage to the sites
will negatively affect visitor numbers and revenue from ticket sales, and indirect earnings for the food,
hospitality, and tourism sectors. Built heritage is almost always accompanied by intangible cultural
heritage in the communities that live around the site, forming not only the foundation of social systems,
but also supporting livelihoods. Damaged heritage sites, loss of income, displacement, and possible
migration to urban centers will continue to result in heavy, often irreparable losses to the tangible and
intangible cultural heritage of Pakistan.

Recovery and Reconstruction Needs: PKR 1.8 billion (US$8.5 million)

Immediate to short-term measures include detailed damage assessment and funds mobilization. Urgent
stabilization measures must then be carried out at the most fragile sites, with the support of appropriate
equipment, material, and trained expertise. Medium-term measures must focus on the capacity building
of heritage management staff to better equip them to implement urgent stabilization measures and
emergency preparedness response for the current and future natural disasters. Long-term measures
include the inclusion of indigenous knowledge into mainstream practices, such as water management
systems and sustainable building practices, to establish more climate-resilient societies and to safeguard
intangible cultural heritage. Improved flood protection mechanisms for heritage sites in vulnerable areas
must be established. Policy actions required in the long term include stricter enforcement of construction,
conservation, and protection regulations for heritage sites. Early warning systems, protective measures, and
evacuation plans for vulnerable sites and movable heritage during known high-risk periods (e.g., monsoon)
must be established. Regular training of staff to build capacity in global best practices as well as indigenous
knowledge for protective measures against climate-induced calamities are also necessary. There is a dire
need to collect data, build provincial and national inventories for cultural heritage, and include contributions
of the culture and creative industries to national GDP.



                                                                                                          Social   53
                Infrastructure




                                 Photo credit: UNDP



54   Infrastructure
Transport and Communications


Damage: PKR 701 billion (US$3,264 million)
Loss: PKR 60 billion (US$281 million)

The main impact in this sector has been on roads, railways, bridges, and telecommunications
infrastructure. Initial estimates suggest that approximately 8,330 kilometers of roads (about 3.2 percent
of total in-service roads) and 3,127 kilometers of railway track (around 40 percent of total in-service
railways) have been damaged to various extents due to the floods. The railway sector has been the most
impacted, given its large pre-flood maintenance backlog. Telecommunications infrastructure damage
includes damage to fiber optic transmission lines, feeder cables, and in some cases transmission towers.
Sindh has sustained the highest damages, followed by Balochistan and KP.

Recovery and Reconstruction Needs: PKR 1,073 billion (US$4,994 million)

The needs estimates factors in post-flood escalation and costs for building back better and smarter to
ensure muti-hazard disaster resilience of investments. Most roads and railways have been temporarily
restored in the damaged sections so that traffic can resume. Temporary steel bridges were launched
on an emergency basis and diversions were created to restore access and connectivity for sections
that were washed away. However, some road and rail sections in central Sindh remain inundated and
operations suspended. For the short term, priority ought to be given to restoring critical transport
links (railways, roads, bridges) where operations are suspended, to restoring basic connectivity, and to
replacing temporary works with permanent repairs where damages are minor. For the medium to long
term, investments should be prioritized to reconstruct and rehabilitate the core national and provincial
transport corridors carrying the highest volumes (road and rail), and road sections in the production hubs
of the affected area (livelihood restoration). The resources should then progressively shift toward complete
rehabilitation of secondary corridors and rural roads. The vulnerability and risk assessment data should
also be used by the Pakistan Telecommunication Authority to ensure that the damaged infrastructure of
telecommunication companies is restored to climate and disaster resilience standards as a functioning
telecommunication system is critical for the efficacy of early warning systems and emergency response.




Energy


Damage: PKR 19 billion (US$88 million)
Loss: PKR 0.5 billion (US$2.5 million)

For the petroleum sector, the total reported damages are PKR 2 billion (US$9.3 million). Damage in
the petroleum sector is primarily reported from the impairment of the transmission and distribution




                                                                                              Infrastructure   55
     pipeline network of Sui Southern Gas Company (SSGC) in Sindh and Balochistan provinces. In the power
     sector, most of the direct damage is to the distribution network and the hydroelectric power generation
     stations. Due to distribution network outages, most of the affected population in Sindh, Balochistan,
     southern Punjab, and KP suffered from electricity blackouts. Damage was also observed in several
     micro- and mini-hydroelectric power generation facilities; although this will have minimal impact on
     national generation capacity, it will nonetheless adversely affect many remote communities that are
     serviced solely by these facilities. In the petroleum sector, major damage has been reported to buildings
     infrastructure in Balochistan and Sindh. The distribution pipelines of SSGC have been partially damaged,
     up to 14.5 kilometers in Balochistan and 2.8 kilometers in Sindh. In addition, two gas distribution pipelines
     to Quetta—the provincial capital of Balochistan have also been damaged. The refineries and oil and gas
     exploration companies have not reported any damages or losses due to the floods as these are covered
     under the insurance policy subject to a certain percent of deductibles.

     Recovery and Reconstruction Needs: PKR 25 billion (US$117 million)

     The power sector utilities have already restored electricity wherever possible. However, the restoration
     cost has still been included in the needs for the power sector as the partial restoration carried out by the
     public sector power companies does not take into consideration the disaster vulnerability and related
     resilience requirement of restored infrastructure. It is imperative that the distribution network design is
     reviewed to make it more resilient to natural hazards such as floods and other disasters. The rehabilitation
     of micro- and mini-hydroelectric power plants mostly managed by communities has higher needs to
     ensure climate and disaster resilient designs and reconstruction, as they lack any options to access
     alternate sources of electricity in cases of disruption, which directly impacts livelihoods and access to
     education and facilities. Key recommendations include: (i) fast-track infrastructure restoration by allocating
     resources by utilizing existing stores and spares, and mobilizing existing civil works contractors of power
     utilities; (ii) immediately undertake vulnerability and risk assessment of damaged infrastructure both in
     the public sector and community infrastructure and advise revised design parameters to be used during
     complete restoration process; (iii) fast-track procurement for replenishment of stores and spares, and
     complete resilient restoration; and (iv) establish and implement standard operating procedures during
     emergencies and natural catastrophes. Recommended policy actions for the energy sector include:
     (i) establishing policy for unrecovered receivables from customers in the affected areas and subsidy/
     financing for reconstruction of damaged community infrastructure; and (ii) policy for compensation to
     public sector companies for providing subsidized electricity or gas facilities during the emergency phases.




56   Infrastructure
WASH, Municipal Services,
and Community Infrastructure


Damage: PKR 123 billion (US$575 million)
Loss: PKR 24 billion (US$112 million)

There has been damage to more than 7,060 schemes, including 4,344 water supply schemes and
2,716 sanitation (including drainage, pavement, and solid waste) schemes in the public sector, of which
almost 84 percent are managed by the Public Health Engineering Department. A total of 1,346 water
and sanitation schemes have been fully destroyed, while 5,714 are partially damaged, requiring major
repair and rehabilitation. The estimated damage for public sector schemes has been assessed at PKR
40 billion (US$186 million). With negligible data available on community or private infrastructure and
water and sanitation services that serve two-thirds of the affected population, the damage based on
secondary data is estimated at PKR 83 billion (US$386 million). Estimated losses include forgone income
of the utilities, additional cost incurred by about 1.5 million households on accessing water for three
months, and additional health burden due to poor sanitation, all as the result of the floods. Complete
indirect health impacts due to lack of access to water and sanitation cannot be fully assessed; however,
increasing incidents of malaria, diarrhea, typhoid, and gastrointestinal diseases have been reported from
the affected areas. The human impact is disproportionately borne by vulnerable groups, including women,
the elderly, pregnant and lactating mothers, and children.

Recovery and Reconstruction Needs: PKR 70 billion (US$327 million)

The multi-hazard resilient reconstruction of damaged or destroyed public infrastructure in the WASH
sector is estimated to cost PKR 58 billion (US$270 million). In addition, PKR 12 billion (US$56 million)
is the estimated cost of re-establishing water and sanitation services for the private and community
schemes, which is based on subsidies of 5 percent of the total needs of the housing sector, excluding 30
percent damaged or destroyed houses that are served by the public sector utilities. The recovery and
reconstruction process needs to be an inclusive and people-centric process, which supports community-
led smart solutions to WASH challenges to ensure that rehabilitated water supply and sanitation
infrastructure is resilient and can be managed and operated sustainably. In the short term, focus would
remain on rehabilitation, cleaning and disinfection, repair of WASH facilities with minor damage, setting
up other temporary arrangements to ensure immediate availability of water and sanitation across the
affected area, and a targeted outreach for the vulnerable people. The reconstruction estimates include an
allowance to resize and relocate a critical subcomponent of the water and sanitation facilities to ensure
these are located and designed to sustain future disasters. In the medium term, the focus should be to find
more locally tailored innovative solutions, building back better and smarter, increasing system calibration
to improve monitoring and management, and increasing the role of local communities and the private
sector in sustainable operations of these facilities. Appropriate oversight, regulations, and facilitations
system will have to be put in place in the medium to long term to create appropriate incentives and
institutional structures to sustainably operate the WASH services and improve the interface between
service providers and their clients. The policy and regulatory improvement in the long term would need
to focus on water quality, level of services, and appropriate tariff structure to increase efficiency of
operations and prudence in the use of water.


                                                                                              Infrastructure   57
                 Productive Sectors




                               Photo credit: UNDP



58   Productive Sectors
Agriculture, Food, Livestock, and Fisheries


Damage: PKR 800 billion (US$3,725 million)
Loss: PKR 1,986 billion (US$9,244 million)

Crops contributed to 82 percent of the total damage and losses in the sector, followed by livestock with 17
percent and fisheries/aquaculture with the remaining 1 percent. Around 4,410 million acres of agricultural
land has been damaged, and 0.8 million livestock are estimated to have perished. Sindh and Balochistan
are the most affected provinces, contributing 72 percent and 21 percent respectively to the total value of
damage and losses registered in the sector, followed by KP, Punjab, and special regions. The destruction
of crops, livestock, and aquaculture infrastructure and assets has resulted in the temporary deterioration
of livelihoods, employment and agriculture related income, as well as potential decline of exports of
important crops such as cotton and sugar cane.

Recovery and Reconstruction Needs: PKR 854 billion (US$3,976 million)

Reconstruction needs include restoration of assets at the individual/community level, as well as support
to the public and private sector (poultry/dairy industry), which were also affected by the floods. Short-
term activities should address immediate needs by ensuring preparedness for the incoming rabi season
through land clearance and land preparation, and the distribution of agricultural inputs (seeds and
fertilizers) to small and medium farmers. Scale-up in the provision of livestock feed, fodder, veterinary
drugs, and restocking of small animals (poultry), especially targeting women and the most vulnerable
households, is necessary. Rehabilitation of fishponds, irrigation schemes (including clearing and
repairing watercourses), channels, and on-farm structures should be also implemented in the short
term, together with the restoration of destroyed animal shelters, veterinary hospital, and clinics. In the
medium to long term, various capacity-building exercises should be conducted with small and medium
farmers and livestock keepers on risk mitigation practices, such as support to ecofriendly and climate-
smart agriculture and livestock rearing. Awareness creation and development of standardized weather/
holistic hazards index-based crop and livestock insurance systems targeting small holders should be
also promoted.




Water Resources and Irrigation


Damage: PKR 153 billion (US$711 million)

Public assets represent 98.5 percent of the total damage, while private assets account for 1.5 percent.
Flood protection infrastructures and irrigation channels incurred the most damage at 36 percent and
32 percent, respectively; followed by drainage systems at 14 percent; dams, headworks, and weirs at 9
percent; and other supporting infrastructures at 8 percent. Overall, the irrigation water supply systems


                                                                                           Productive Sectors   59
     (canals and dams) jointly suffered 41 percent of the total damage, which, if unaddressed, will adversely
     affect crop production in the coming production seasons. Contingent upon the recovery of the irrigation
     and drainage systems, especially in Sindh, low wheat production can be anticipated this year, which
     could lead to food shortages and high food commodity prices. Poor drainage in Sindh will further reduce
     crop production. In arid areas covering most of Balochistan, damage to irrigation and water storage
     infrastructures is causing disruption of irrigation services. Losses to crops due to flooding and inadequate
     irrigation supplies, siltation, and waterlogging are covered by the agriculture sector.

     Recovery and Reconstruction Needs: PKR 168 billion (US$782 million)

     The short-term recovery strategy will require the immediate restoration of irrigation supplies and repairing
     critical damage to canals, drains, and flood protection embankment before the next main rainy season in June
     2023. This comprises 15 percent of the total need. The intermediate-term recovery comprises 30 percent
     of the overall assessed needs and includes strengthening of canals, drainage ways, dams and appurtenant
     structures, construction of new structures and strengthening of flood protection embankment through
     structural and non-structural measures. The long-term recovery comprises the remaining 55 percent of
     the overall assessed needs and includes the complete operation of drains and drainage systems, canal
     systems, enhanced safety and stability of flood protection embankments, hydraulic structures, and flood
     channels. While investment in infrastructure reconstruction and rehabilitation will play a prominent role in
     the recovery, building long-term resilience will require considering the whole spectrum of infrastructural
     solutions and paying due attention to more effective nature-based solutions, taking advantage of landscape
     features and ecosystems. A more holistic approach, well grounded into spatial planning at the level of the
     adequate hydrological unit (watershed, catchment, or basin) and supported by adequate institutions and
     policies, will be needed. Increased focus on strategic measures to improve longer-term resilience, including
     enhanced enforcement of flood zoning arrangements, decision-making mechanisms relying on flood
     forecasting, and early warning systems, should be part of a medium to long-term recovery strategy. For this
     purpose, some key studies are recommended to: (i) identify and prioritize no-regret urgent interventions
     to be implemented in the short and medium term; and (ii) develop strategic master plans for resilience
     building in sensitive areas. A post-flood rapid scoping study needs to be conducted to specify the contours
     of such studies.



     Commerce and Industries


     Damage: PKR 40 billion (US$186 million)
     Loss: PKR 758 billion (US$3,527 million)

     The impact was assessed using data received from Punjab and KP provinces, in addition to leveraging
     the Census of Manufacturing and Industries and Small and Households Manufacturing Industries data in
     conjunction with assumptions for the provinces of Balochistan and Sindh. The assessed damages and
     losses are not proportionate to the relatively large contribution of the industries and commerce sector
     in the economy, given that the floods largely spared the industrial heartland of the country, in addition to
     key urban centers.



60   Productive Sectors
There is a case for supporting the industries and commerce sector through market-oriented and fiscally
neutral measures. Industries along with transport and storage, together with retail and wholesale trade,
account for a sizable 47 percent of GDP and close to 46 percent of employees of ages 10 and above as of
FY21, alluding to the importance of these subsectors for the economy and country at large. While direct
support may not be feasible given the constrained fiscal and overarching macro position of the country,
the sectors and firms within these sectors may be supported through market-oriented and fiscally
neutral measures staggered over the short to medium term. The need for these measures pre-dates
the floods, but their importance has only grown with the cascading economic impact of the floods. The
three most important measures to facilitate recovery in the short to medium term include: (i) increased
access to finance to restart operations, replenish working capital, and rehabilitate/replace capital where
it was damaged/destroyed; (ii) continued implementation of business regulatory reforms throughout
the recovery period, such as accelerating/streamlining processing of regulatory licenses, permits, and
certificates; and (iii) design and implementation of a new economic census.




Finance and Markets


Damage: PKR 0.6 billion (US$2.9 million)
Loss: PKR 90 billion (US$417 million)

The impact of the floods on the financial sector has been assessed primarily through damage to the
physical infrastructure and projected loan losses of the banking and microfinance sectors (the latter
includes microfinance banks [MFBs] and microfinance institutions [MFIs]). The reported impact to the
physical infrastructure of the financial sector includes damages to 268 branches and an estimated 35
automated teller machines (ATMs) operated by commercial banks. Additionally, 81 microfinance branches
and 2 ATMs have also been estimated as damaged. The physical infrastructure damages are estimated to
be PKR 600 million (US$2.8 million), of which PKR 510 million (US$2.4 million) is in the commercial banking
sector and PKR 90 million (US$0.4 million) in the microfinance sector. The flood-induced incremental non-
performing loans of the banking and microfinance sector are estimated at PKR 84.2 billion (US$392.0
million), based on data provided by the sector regulators. Of these, the commercial bank losses are
estimated at PKR 26 billion (US$121 million), MFB losses at PKR 33.9 billion (US$157.8 million), and MFI
losses at PKR 24.3 billion (US$113.1 million). A further PKR 5.44 billion (US$25.3 million) is estimated as
additional insurance sector claims that are not re-insured abroad, and PKR 190 million (US$0.9 million)
as insurance infrastructure losses.

The financial sector recovery needs will emanate from its ability and inclination to enhance lending
to the private sector. The rising risks to the commercial banking sector will hamper access to finance
and limit credit to the private sector. Severe shocks to financial systems can lead to risk aversion from
banks, especially in scenarios where the capital base has been weakened. This would lead to even more
hesitancy in lending to a private sector that is already crowded out by lending to the public sector. The
microfinance sector will become especially important to expand financial inclusion. The impact of the
floods may constrain the liquidity of the microfinance sector in maintaining and growing its loan portfolio.
Broad recommendations to support the financial sector include: (i) credit guarantee facilities; (ii) targeted
regulatory forbearance that is time-bound; (iii) enhancing targeted refinancing lines for the housing,



                                                                                            Productive Sectors   61
     agriculture, and small and-medium-sized enterprise sectors; and (iv) supporting the microfinance sector
     through lines of credit and disaster risk insurance.




     Tourism


     Damage: PKR 2 billion (US$10 million)
     Loss: PKR 20 billion (US$93 million)

     The 2022 floods caused widespread devastation to the travel and tourism industry by damaging the
     connectivity infrastructure (roads and bridges) and partially or completely destroying the private sector
     enterprises and markets in the tourism value chains across Pakistan. This led to an immediate decline
     in the tourist footfall during peak tourism season. Tourism enterprises such as hotels, restaurants, and
     tour operators incurred physical damages and revenue losses. The supply chains were disrupted, and a
     complete closure of tourist sites have occurred in the affected districts. Almost 4,170 direct jobs in the
     private sector have been adversely impacted by the floods. These include permanent losses of seasonal
     jobs and partial losses in long-term jobs43 within the tourism industry. The damages are more profound
     in KP, while sites in Sindh, Punjab, Balochistan, and other areas have reported losses. In KP, 12 percent
     of hotels have been completely destroyed and 6 percent have been partially damaged; and 57 percent of
     restaurants have been destroyed and 14 percent have been partially damaged. Total combined damage and
     losses reported in KP are PKR 2 billion (US$9.7 million) and PKR 11.2 billion (US$52.1 million), respectively.
     In Punjab, losses to the private sector amount to PKR 2.2 billion (US$10.2 million). Public sector damages
     for Sindh stand at PKR 20 million (US$0.1 million) and losses amount to PKR 10 million (US$0.05 million),
     whereas losses to the private sector stand at PKR 1.8 billion (US$8.2 million). The private sector losses for
     Balochistan’s tourism sector were reported to be PKR 440 million (US$2 million). Some geographic areas
     reported no infrastructural damage but continue to suffer losses due to the reduced occupancy in hotels
     and substantial downfall in the private sector activity.

     Recovery and Reconstruction Needs: PKR 0.4 billion (US$1.6 million)

     The immediate focus for sector recovery should be to provide financial support (through microfinance
     products, matching grants, microinsurance) to existing small businesses that are able to operate but
     face a liquidity crunch, which is aggravated due to a decrease in tourism activity in the affected areas.
     The tourist footfall has improved during October44 but is still below the optimal levels typically recorded
     during this season. Public sector recovery efforts for the tourism sector should focus on enterprises
     that provide employment and livelihoods to the local communities. Equally important is to strengthen the
     communication infrastructure through the 24/7 helplines and social media handles for tourists traveling
     to these areas. Medium to long-term activities need to focus on resilience of the sector, strengthening of
     the enforcement of building codes and anti-encroachment acts, and spatial planning of tourism zones.




     43 Long-term jobs include contractual jobs spanning one year or longer. Jobs losses factor in a workforce that is self-employed or hired
        by transport, travel, and tourism industry, including tour operators, car/jeep rentals, hotels, restaurants, and travel agents.
     44 Tourist footfall in KP province during October 1–19, 2022, was 114,086, which is far below the destinations’ capacity.




62   Productive Sectors
Cross-cutting




                Photo credit: UNDP



                       Cross-cutting   63
     Social Protection, Livelihoods,
     and Jobs


     Loss: PKR 130 billion (US$607 million)

     The floods have caused destruction to lives and livelihoods in all provinces. Preliminary estimates suggest
     that, without decisive relief and recovery efforts to help the poor, the national poverty rate may increase
     by 3.7 to 4.0 percentage points, pushing between 8.4 to 9.1 million people into poverty. This is likely to
     make them prone to adopting negative coping strategies, such as non-fulfillment of health and nutritional
     needs, taking children out of school, engaging in child labor, and selling productive assets—all of which
     can make households spiral into poverty with intergenerational impacts. The sector assessment looks at
     aspects of protection and promotion with two main areas of impacts: livelihoods

      and human capital. The sector losses are confined to income losses of the population exposed to the
     floods. A total of 4.3 million workers across all provinces have been affected, with varied income losses
     due to severity and duration of the impact.

     Recovery and Reconstruction Needs: PKR 361 billion (US$1,683 million)

     The sector strategies include emergency employment services, skills development initiatives, and
     employment intensive investments for livelihoods and jobs-related reconstruction and rehabilitation
     activities. On the social assistance side, multipurpose humanitarian support; conditional cash transfers
     linked to education, health, and nutrition; and workfare programs are the focus of attention.




     Governance


     Damage: PKR 13 billion (US$60 million)
     Loss: PKR 5 billion (US$23 million)

     The 2022 floods have wreaked havoc on both the state apparatus and societal formations. While the floods
     have affected much of the country, the level of destruction in Sindh and Balochistan is of unprecedented
     scale and intensity. The losses and damage suffered by the public service of the Criminal Justice System
     is cause for immediate concern, given their centrality in the provision of justice services to vulnerable
     citizens residing in these relatively underdeveloped regions. Data collected from government counterparts
     tells us that Sindh has been hit the hardest with 1,395 buildings damaged, followed by Balochistan (796),
     KP (135), Punjab (59), and other areas (11).




64   Cross-cutting
Recovery and Reconstruction Needs: PKR 19 billion (US$88 million)

Local governments already constrained for resources and capacities are in a potentially grave situation,
with the resulting impact of losses further deteriorating service delivery and, in turn, citizen–state trust.
Moreover, as disasters do not affect the population equally, it is even more important for governance
structures and mechanisms to be gender and inclusion responsive. Corruption in emergency procurement
reduces the resources available for life-saving operations, lowers the quality of products and services
provided, and diverts aid from those who need it most. It also negatively influences public support for
emergency relief and medium-term rehabilitation activities. It is therefore essential that both immediate
and medium-term actions are taken by the federal and provincial governments and development
partners along with local agents (public and private) to address key issues. The recovery strategy also
emphasizes the need of better coordination, effective aid management, and building a comprehensive
monitoring and implementation framework with clearly defined results to help governments and donors
monitor activities at both micro and macro levels. A centralized response may be more viable, given
the National Command and Operation Center experience under COVID-19. Key policy recommendations
include: (i) strengthen the institutional framework and coordination for disaster management, eliminating
institutional overlaps by clearly delineating the roles and responsibilities of all levels of government in
the National Flood Response; (ii) prioritize the restoration of services and infrastructure for rule of law
and governance institutions; (iii) develop a framework for climate sensitive planning and budgeting at
national and provincial levels; (iv) support the provincial and federal governments in speeding up the re-
prioritization of public investments; (v) build local capacities and systems for improved public financial
management, procurement, and accountability systems; (vi) strategic engagement of community-based
organizations and CSOs with Provincial and District Disaster Management Authorities for post-disaster
monitoring and coordination; and (vii) strategic risk communications during the emergency response,
recovery, and relief phase.




Social Sustainability,
Inclusion, and Gender


Damage: PKR 4.4 million (US$0.02 million)

The 2022 floods have severely impacted livelihoods for socially excluded and marginalized groups. These
disproportionately vulnerable populations, primarily comprised of women, include landless farmers, on-
and off-farm agricultural and livestock/dairy workers, and home-based workers connected to agriculture
or other sectors, mostly manufacturing. Women and girls are facing manifold increases in both unpaid
domestic and care work, and the analysis further noted that they also face increased threats of violence.
This is accompanied by limited access to health, education, and social protection, and the depletion of
personal assets to support basic household needs. Other social groups facing discrimination and lack of
access to relief include minorities (ethnic, religious, caste), transgender persons, older people, people with
disabilities, people living with HIV/AIDS, young people, children and infants, and refugees and temporarily
displaced populations. Their access to relief is severely limited and not effectively factored into relief
planning and delivery. Further, a breakdown of social relations was noted, closely linked to displacement.



                                                                                                 Cross-cutting   65
     This has severely impacted cohesion within communities. Rising tensions have been exacerbated by
     insufficient, irregular, uncoordinated, and inequitable aid, and relief distribution. Violence and conflict
     are a frequent occurrence, including over aid. There are widespread concerns over elite capture and aid
     mismanagement.

     Recovery and Reconstruction Needs: PKR 21 billion (US$96 million)

     Recommended short-term relief and recovery strategies include: (i) provide immediate relief to
     underserved communities with gender balanced humanitarian response teams (minimum 40 percent
     women), and strengthened coordination with gender machineries and stakeholders; (ii) support sex,
     age, and disability disaggregated data collection, and ongoing needs’ assessments to identify critical
     gaps; (iii) strengthen communications and outreach, with clear information about aid distribution and
     advocacy, and monitoring and evaluation, that prioritizes the meaningful participation of excluded and
     special needs groups; (iv) rollout psychosocial support services and programs for affected communities.
     Medium and long-term recommendations include: (i) expand protection services against GBV and abuse
     by establishing and/or strengthening crisis centers and other relevant structures, building institutional
     capacity to address GBV and the specific needs of children, persons with disabilities, and the elderly;
     (ii) conduct behavioral change interventions for GBV prevention; (iii) raise awareness of government
     service providers on the social impacts of disasters on vulnerable and marginalized communities and
     the risks and impacts of maladaptation; (iv) establish and/or strengthen community-led platforms to
     expedite recovery efforts by vulnerable groups and communities to fast-track recovery; (v) train local
     authorities on inclusive post-disaster assessments, gender-responsive early warning, evacuation and
     resettlement, and related communication strategies as part of further disaster preparedness efforts; and
     (vi) provide gender-responsive budgeting for all plans and budgets, specifying stakeholders, indicators,
     and benchmarks for achieving gender equality aims.




     Environment and Climate Change


     Damage: PKR 4 billion (US$18 million)
     Loss: PKR 6 billion (US$30 million)

     The estimation includes damage and loss in forestry, protected areas, and from landslides. Forestry
     accounts for approximately 60 percent of total environmental damages and almost 99 percent of losses.
     Sindh sustained the highest damage in the forest sector, amounting to PKR 1.8 billion (US$8.4 million),
     representing 77 percent of total forest damages. Damage from landslides and soil erosion in residential
     areas represent 29 percent of total environmental damages. Protected areas, wildlife, and infrastructure
     in national parks account for around 11 percent of overall damages. Chemical spills and contaminated
     sites were reported, but no environmental surveys have been conducted to characterize and quantify
     damages. These quantitative estimates are expected to be substantially underestimated due to the
     paucity of environmental data and inherent challenges in estimating ecosystem services. The full extent
     of damage to forests, biodiversity, land, and pollution clean-up is yet to be fully accounted and requires
     more detailed investigations.




66   Cross-cutting
Recovery and Reconstruction Needs: PKR 35 billion (US$164 million)

Ecosystem-based adaptation and nature-based solutions are key approaches in addressing floods and
droughts that are exacerbated by climate change in Pakistan. Such approaches need to be urgently
accelerated to help build resilience at the community and national levels. The recovery and reconstruction
needs estimate includes those stemming from flood damages, enhancing natural capital in the most
impacted and high-risk sites, and strengthening governance capacities to provide environmental
oversight of the reconstruction. Sector-specific and environment-related needs, including rebuilding
climate-resilient infrastructure, are assumed to have been separately captured in the relevant sectoral
assessments as they are not easily apportioned out and to avoid double counting. Beyond the immediate
needs identified in this assessment, an expanded environmental recovery strategy is required to achieve
an appreciable level of resilience to climate change induced disasters and check the pace of environmental
degradation and pollution. Such a strategy should be aligned with the government’s stated environmental
strategies and policy objectives for ecological restoration such as the “Living Indus Initiative.” This broader
environmental resilience strategy has an estimated cost of at least PKR 389 billion (US$1.8 billion). Its
three main components are: (i) ecosystem-based restoration and adaptation in vulnerable landscapes
and watersheds (PKR 172 billion; US$800 million); (ii) pollution reduction and waste management (PKR
140 billion; US$652 million); and (iii) strengthening environmental governance (PKR 78 billion; US$363
million).




Disaster Risk Reduction and Resilience


Damage: PKR 1.0 billion (US$4.7 million)

This amount only accounts for damage to buildings and equipment of manned weather observatories of the
Pakistan Meteorological Department (PMD) and flood level gauges of the Water and Power Development
Authority and the Hydrology Irrigation Division, KP. Compared to the baseline total, 48 percent of the
PMD’s observatories were damaged. Damage to weather monitoring stations and devices is likely to
impair weather forecasting and flood warning capacity of the relevant government offices, which could
result in further damage and loss due to poor forecasts. No losses were calculated, as no disruptions
were reported for the disaster response services of the sector.

Recovery and Reconstruction Needs: PKR 35 billion (US$161 million)

The estimate comprises reconstruction and expansion of the flood risk monitoring and early warning
systems and strengthened institutional and community capacity for disaster planning and response over
the next five years. It excludes the costs of flood risk reduction infrastructure (embankments, levees,
drainage) included within the Water and Irrigation Sector section. The recovery strategy approach centers
around enhancing government (particularly district-level government) and community capacity to plan
and respond to disasters. The immediate renewal and upgrading of the National Disaster Management
Plan (2012–2022) and National Flood Protection Plan – IV will inform key details for recovery for the sector.
The recovery needs include strengthening hazard mapping, monitoring, and early warning systems;
mainstreaming disaster risk reduction, disaster risk management, and climate resilience in planning
systems and processes; and upgrading evacuation shelters and warehousing.


                                                                                                  Cross-cutting   67
     Annex 1:
     List of Acknowledgments for the PDNA
     Stakeholder Engagement Meetings

     Public Entities and Government Affiliated Organizations: Pakistan Red Crescent Society (PRCS); Sui
     Northern Gas Pipelines (SNGPL).

     Rural Support Programs: Aga Khan Rural Support Programme (AKRSP); Balochistan Rural Support
     Programme; Gilgit Baltistan Rural Support Programme (GBRSP); Rural Support Programmes Network;
     Sarhad Rural Support Programme (SRSP); Thardeep Rural Development Programme (TRDP).

     Local NGOs/CSOs/Associations/Youth Groups: Akhuwat Islamic Microfinance; Alternative Law Collective;
     Area Development Organization (ADO); Association for Integrated Development (AID) Balochistan; Doaba
     Foundation; Gender and Empowerment Organization; Hashoo Foundation; HOPE’87 Pakistan; HUJRA
     Village Support Organization; Khari Shareef Welfare Society (KSWS); MEHER Balochistan; Pakistan
     Fisherfolk Forum (PFF); Publishing Extension Network (PEN); Rupani Foundation; Saibaan Development
     Organization; Social Action Bureau for Assistance in Welfare & Organizational Networking (SABAWON);
     Veer Development Organization (VDO); Water, Environment and Sanitation Society (WESS); Women Welfare
     Organization; Youth Organization Balochistan.

     Think Tanks/Research/Academia: The Agriculture University, Peshawar; Balochistan University
     of Information Technology, Engineering and Management Sciences (BUITEMS); Centre for Disaster
     Preparedness and Management, University of Peshawar; Commission on Science and Technology for
     Sustainable Development in the South (COMSATS) University; Global Change Impact Studies Centre
     (GCISC); Lahore University of Management Sciences (LUMS); Mehran University of Engineering and
     Technology; Sustainable Development Policy Institute (SDPI); Independent Journalists.

     International Non-governmental Organizations: International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN);
     Islamic Relief; Muslim Aid UK; Muslim Hands; World Wildlife Fund (WWF).

     UN/International Organizations: Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO); International Federation of Red
     Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC); International Labour Organization (ILO); International Organization
     for Migration (IOM); Italian Agency for Development Cooperation (AICS); Japan International Cooperation
     Agency (JICA); United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP); United Nations Educational, Scientific
     and Cultural Organization (UNESCO); United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF); United Nations Industrial
     Development Organization (UNIDO); United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS); United Nations
     Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN Women); World Health Organization (WHO),
     World Food Programme (WFP), United Nations Human Settlement Program (UNHABITAT), International
     Labour Organization (ILO), United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), United Nations High Commission for
     Refugees, (UNHCR), United Nations Program on HIV/SIDA (UNAIDS).




68   Annex 1: List of Acknowledgments for the PDNA Stakeholder Engagement Meetings
﻿   69
Ministry of Planning
Development &
Special Initiatives
